Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 R ETHINKING R ESIDUAL E RRORS IN C OMPENSATION - BASED LLM Q UANTIZATION Shuaiting Li 1 , 2 ∗ , Juncan Deng 1 , 2 ∗ , Kedong Xu 2 , Rongtao Deng 2 , Hong Gu 2 , Minghan Jiang 1 , Haibin Shen 1 † , Kejie Huang 1 † 1 Zhejiang University 2 vivo Mobile Communication Co., Ltd { list,dengjuncan,jiangmh,shen hb,huangkejie } @zju.edu.cn { xukedong, dengrongtao, guhong } @vivo.com A BSTRACT Methods based on weight compensation, which iteratively apply quantization and weight compensation to minimize the output error, have recently demonstrated remarkable success in quantizing Large Language Models (LLMs). The repre- sentative work, GPTQ, introduces several key techniques that make such iterative methods practical for LLMs with billions of parameters. GPTAQ extends this approach by introducing an asymmetric calibration process that aligns the out- put of each quantized layer with its full-precision counterpart, incorporating a residual error into the weight compensation framework. In this work, we revisit the formulation of the residual error. We identify a sub-optimal calibration ob- jective in existing methods: during the intra-layer calibration process, they align the quantized output with the output from compensated weights, rather than the true output from the original full-precision model. Therefore, we redefine the objective to precisely align the quantized model’s output with the original out- put of the full-precision model at each step. We then reveal that the residual error originates not only from the output difference of the preceding layer but also from the discrepancy between the compensated and original weights within each layer, which we name the ’compensation-aware error’. By inheriting the neuron decomposition technique from GPTAQ, we can efficiently incorporate this compensation-aware error into the weight update process. Extensive ex- periments on various LLMs and quantization settings demonstrate that our pro- posed enhancements integrate seamlessly with both GPTQ and GPTAQ, signifi- cantly improving their quantization performance. Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/list0830/ResComp . 1 I NTRODUCTION Since the advent of the Transformer architecture (Vaswani, 2017), it has become the cornerstone of Large Language Models (LLMs) (Touvron et al., 2023; DeepSeek-AI, 2024; Team, 2023; OpenAI, 2022; xAI, 2024; et al., 2023), driving unprecedented growth in their scale (Brown et al., 2020). This scaling is primarily driven by two of its core design principles: first, the self-attention mechanism, whose computational complexity grows quadratically with the input sequence length; and second, the massive feed-forward networks (FFNs) within each Transformer block, which constitute the vast majority of the model’s parameters. While these designs have led to remarkable performance improvements, they have also resulted in enormous parameter counts and computational require- ments. For instance, the Llama 3 70B model (Meta, 2024) comprises 70 billion parameters and requires 140GB of GPU memory for inference at its native 16-bit precision. Such immense resource demands severely restrict the deployment of these state-of-the-art models in resource-constrained environments, thereby underscoring the critical importance of model compression techniques such as quantization. ∗ Equal contribution, Work done during an internship at vivo Mobile Communication. † Corresponding Authors 1 arXiv:2604.07955v1 [cs.LG] 9 Apr 2026

---

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Quantization is a classic and effective model compression technique (Gholami et al., 2022) that significantly reduces memory footprint and accelerates computation by mapping high-precision floating-point weights and activations to low-precision integer formats, all without altering the model architecture. Quantization methods are broadly categorized into two families: Quantization-Aware Training (QAT) (Jacob et al., 2018; Shao et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024) and Post-Training Quan- tization (PTQ) (Lin et al., 2023; Dettmers et al., 2022; Frantar & Alistarh, 2022). QAT typically achieves higher accuracy by updating quantization parameters through gradient-based optimization during a fine-tuning phase. However, its substantial fine-tuning cost renders it impractical for to- day’s ultra-large models. In contrast, PTQ requires no fine-tuning, enabling model quantization at a remarkably low cost. This efficiency establishes PTQ as the dominant paradigm for LLM com- pression (Nagel et al., 2021). GPTQ (Frantar et al., 2022) is a representative PTQ approach that performs layer-wise calibration and leverages Hessian information to compensate for quantization errors. Building upon this, GPTAQ (Li et al., 2025) introduces an asymmetric calibration process that effectively mitigates the layer-by-layer accumulation of errors. The core idea of this process is to align the output of each quantized layer with its full-precision counterpart by propagating the output error from the preceding layer into the current layer’s calibration as a residual. In this work, we focus on the output alignment problem within the intra-layer iterative process of the GPTQ and GPTAQ methods. We find that previous works compute the calibration target at each step using the compensated weights, thereby neglecting alignment with the original output of the full-precision layer, which we argue is the more precise calibration objective. We reformulate this new objective and reveal that a more precise residual error should not only include the output error propagated from the preceding layer but also an intrinsic error introduced by weight compensation within the current layer, which we term the compensation-aware error. We leverage the neuron decomposition technique from GPTAQ to efficiently incorporate this compensation-aware error into the weight update process. Furthermore, our proposed improvements readily integrate with both the GPTQ and GPTAQ frameworks. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows: • We provide an in-depth analysis of the output alignment at each step and propose a more precise residual error formulation that incorporates both the inter-layer propagated output error and the intra-layer error introduced by weight compensation. • We develop an efficient method to compute the proposed compensation-aware error and incorporate it into the weight update process, building upon the neuron decomposition. • Our method requires only minimal modifications to the GPTQ and GPTAQ frameworks and achieves significant performance improvements across a wide range of large language models and quantization settings. 2 R ELATED W ORK Post-Training Quantization for LLMs. PTQ is a vital technique for compressing large models without retraining (Gholami et al., 2022), typically falling into two categories. The first category mitigates quantization difficulty by redistributing weights or activations. To handle outliers, methods like LLM.int8() (Dettmers et al., 2022) use mixed-precision, while others apply activation smooth- ing (Xiao et al., 2023), channel reordering (Yuan et al., 2023), or global orthogonal transforms (e.g., Hadamard matrices) to unify distributions (Tseng et al., 2024; Ashkboos et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024). The second category directly compensates for quantization error. For instance, GPTQ (Fran- tar et al., 2022) minimizes layer-wise output error by using second-order information to iteratively update remaining full-precision weights. Compensation-based Quantization. The origins of compensation-based quantization can be traced back to early pioneering work on network pruning (LeCun et al., 1989; Hassibi et al., 1993). The Optimal Brain Damage (OBD) method (LeCun et al., 1989) introduces a framework for pruning by leveraging second-order information under the assumption that the Hessian matrix is diagonal. Sub- sequently, the Optimal Brain Surgeon (OBS) framework (Hassibi et al., 1993) improves upon this by relaxing the diagonal Hessian assumption, which allows for more accurate weight updates. Op- timal Brain Quantization (OBQ) (Frantar & Alistarh, 2022) generalizes this second-order pruning framework to the task of quantization. OBQ processes weights sequentially based on the magnitude of the quantization error, continuously adjusting the remaining full-precision weights to compen- sate. However, its direct application to LLMs remains computationally challenging. To address the 2

---

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 computational challenges of OBQ, GPTQ (Frantar et al., 2022) achieves significant efficiency gains through techniques like lazy batch-updates and a Cholesky reformulation, enabling practical calibra- tion on large-scale models. More recently, GPTAQ (Li et al., 2025) extends the GPTQ framework by introducing an asymmetric calibration mechanism to address error accumulation. This asymmet- ric calibration ensures that the output of each quantized layer aligns with that of its full-precision counterpart. Our work builds upon the GPTQ and GPTAQ framework, offering an in-depth analysis and further enhancing its error compensation mechanism. 3 B ACKGROUND Standard compensation-based quantization methods typically formulate the problem as an iterative optimization process. As shown in the upper part of Fig. 1, the procedure sequentially quantizes weight columns and compensates for the quantization error by adjusting the remaining unquantized weights. We briefly review the formulations of GPTQ and GPTAQ below to establish the baseline for our method. 3.1 N OTATIONS We adopt the problem formulation and notation from GPTAQ Li et al. (2025) solely to facilitate direct comparison. Throughout this paper, we use lowercase boldface (e.g., w ) for vectors and uppercase boldface (e.g., W ) for matrices. We focus on the standard linear layer computation y = wX , where the weight row-vector w ∈ R 1 × n multiplies the input activation matrix X ∈ R n × k to produce the output y ∈ R 1 × k . We denote the quantized version of weights as ˆ w . Furthermore, we use the subscript notation H − q to represent the matrix H with its q -th row excluded. Assuming quantization is performed in column order, We define w ( q ) ∈ R 1 × n as the weight state after q steps of quantization and compensation, with its first q columns (from 0 to q − 1 ) already quantized. w (0) represents the original floating-point weight. Two computation flows are defined to differentiate input sources: As shown in Eqn. 1, When calculating the input for the l -th layer, the Quant-flow X aims to simulate the quantized inference process by using the previously quantized layers for computation. Conversely, the FP-flow e X consistently uses the original floating-point layers for computation. e X l = F ( w l − 1 , e X l − 1 ) , X l = F ( b w l − 1 , X l − 1 ) (1) 3.2 OBQ & GPTQ When quantizing the l -th layer, OBQ and GPTQ employs the Quant-flow throughout the entire process. The objective of both OBQ Frantar & Alistarh (2022) and GPTQ Frantar et al. (2022) is to minimize the reconstruction error between the floating-point weights and the quantized weights under the same input. Therefore, the high-level (layer-level) optimization objective is defined as: min b w || b wX − wX || 2 F , (2) When quantizing the q -th column, to derive the optimal update ∆ w for remaining weights, the low-level (column-level) objective is formulated as: min ∆ w || ( w ( q ) q : + ∆ w ) X q : , : − w ( q ) q : X q : , : || 2 F , s.t. ∆ w q = ˆ w ( q ) q − w ( q ) q (3) The above equation can be solved for the corresponding ∆ w using the Lagrange multiplier method. q = arg min q ( ˆ w q − w q ) 2 H − 1 qq , ∆ w = ( ˆ w q − w q ) H − 1 qq · ( H − 1 q, : ) , (4) where H − 1 = ( XX ⊤ ) − 1 represents the inverse Hessian matrix. Since the quantized weights will no longer be updated, the inverse Hessian for the remaining weights should be updated via gaussian elimination. However, applying OBQ to large models encounters severe efficiency issues. Firstly, it requires storing a different inverse Hessian for every weight row, and secondly, it necessitates 3

---

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Layer i Quantized weight Compensated weight FP weight Quant 1 column Compensate for remaining weights Layer i-1 repeated x N FP flow Quant flow calibrate for (A) GPTQ (B) GPTAQ optimization objective (C) GPTAQ + Ours Our method aligns strictly to FP flow Layer i-2 Figure 1: Overview of compensation-based LLM quantization methods. (A) GPTQ : Minimizes the layer-wise reconstruction error based on the current quantized input flow, neglecting error accumu- lation from previous layers. (B) GPTAQ : Introduces asymmetric calibration to address inter-layer error accumulation, but uses the compensated weights as the calibration target during the update process. (C) GPTAQ+Ours : Strictly aligns with the original full-precision output by incorporat- ing a novel ”Compensation-Aware Error,” which corrects the discrepancy between compensated and original weights. recalculating the inverse Hessian at every iteration. To address these problems, GPTQ first proposed using the same quantization order for all rows to share a single Hessian matrix. It then introduced the Cholesky reformulation H − 1 = LL T to pre-calculate the required inverse Hessian information for each step, thus avoiding repeated computations. This breakthrough made efficient compensation- based quantization possible on large-scale models. 3.3 GPTAQ GPTAQ Li et al. (2025) identifies a key drawback in the former method: the exclusive use of the Quant-flow for calibration. Due to the accumulation of errors across successive layers, the calibra- tion baseline wX itself becomes biased, whereas the output of each layer in the FP-flow , w e X , serves as the accurate reference. Therefore, GPTAQ simultaneously considers both X and e X , attempting to align the Quant-flow and FP-flow at every layer. Therefore, the high-level (layer-level) optimization objective is defined as: min b w || b wX − w e X || 2 F , (5) When quantizing the q -th column, The low-level (column-level) objective in GPTAQ is then formu- lated as: min ∆ w || ( w ( q ) q : + ∆ w ) X q : , : − w ( q ) q : e X q : , : || 2 F , s.t. ∆ w q = ˆ w ( q ) q − w ( q ) q (6) To maintain consistency with the solving procedure in GPTQ, GPTAQ introduces the concept of residual error , defined as r = w ( q ) q : e X q : , : − w ( q ) q : X q : , : . The column-level objective becomes: min ∆ w || ∆ wX q : , : − r q || 2 F , s.t. ∆ w q = ˆ w ( q ) q − w ( q ) q (7) The solution to this Lagrangian introduces an additional correction term to the standard update: ∆ w = ( ˆ w q − w q ) H − 1 qq · ( H − 1 q, : ) | {z } Standard Update + rX ⊤ H − 1 − q | {z } Error Correction . (8) 4

---

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 4 M ETHODS 4.1 R ETHINKING RESIDUAL ERRORS The high-level (layer-level) optimization objective of GPTAQ is exactly correct, as it consistently uses the output of the FP-flow , w e X , as the calibration target (or reference). However, during the iterative quantization process, we found that its column-level optimization objective deviates. Let us re-examine the objective of GPTAQ when quantizing the q -th column: min ∆ w || ( w ( q ) q : + ∆ w ) X q : , : − w ( q ) q : e X q : , : || 2 F , s.t. ∆ w q = ˆ w ( q ) q − w ( q ) q (9) While this formulation holds for the initial step, as w (0) e X is precisely the output from the floating- point layer. However, this becomes inaccurate in subsequent iterations because for q ≥ 1 , w ( q ) e X no longer represents the accurate output. To strictly maintain output alignment with w (0) e X at every step, we can formulate the objective function as: min ∆ w ∥ ( w ( q ) + ∆ w ) X − w (0) e X ∥ 2 F s.t. ∆ w : q = 0 , ∆ w q = ˆ w ( q ) q − w ( q ) q (10) where the left and right sides of the equation represent the complete outputs of the quantized layer and the full-precision layer, respectively. The update term ∆ w is still only applied to non-quantized columns. Eqn. 10 is equal to: min || w ( q ) X + ∆ w q : X q : , : − w (0) e X || 2 F , s.t. ∆ w q = ˆ w ( q ) q − w ( q ) q (11) To align with the notation used in GPTAQ, we can further express the preceding equation as: min || ∆ w q : X q : , : − ( w (0) e X − w ( q ) X ) || 2 F , s.t. ∆ w q = ˆ w ( q ) q − w ( q ) q (12) Therefore, r ′ = ( w (0) e X − w ( q ) X ) is the new residual error, and can be written as: r ′ = w ( q ) ( e X − X ) | {z } r1 + ( w (0) − w ( q ) ) e X | {z } r2 (13) The first term, r 1 , represents the residual error arising from the input error, which is adopted in GPTAQ. The new second term, r 2 , represents the error introduced by the intra-layer weight com- pensation, which we name the ’Compensation-aware Error’ . Therefore, when quantizing the q-th column, by replacing r with r ′ in Eqn. 8, we can derive the new ∆ w as: ∆ w = ( ˆ w ( q ) q − w ( q ) q ) H − 1 qq · ( H − 1 q, : ) + ( r 1 + r 2) X ⊤ H − 1 − q , (14) 4.2 E FFICIENT SOLUTION Following GPTQ, we process weights in an arbitrary order, which is sequentially from the first to the last, to enable parallel processing of all rows. For each column q = 0 , 1 , ...n − 1 , we compute the weight update ∆ W across all rows with: ∆ W = ( c W ( q ) : ,q − W ( q ) : ,q ) H − 1 qq · ( H − 1 q, : ) + ( R 1 + R 2) X ⊤ H − 1 − q (15) where R 1 = W ( q ) e X − W ( q ) X , R 2 = ( W (0) − W ( q ) ) e X . However, re-computation of R 1& R 2 is quite heavy for large foundation models, as pointed out by GPTAQ. alternatively, GPTAQ proposes an efficient neuron decomposition technique to R 1 . Denote ∆ X = e X − X . Similarly, we apply neuron decomposition to R 2 . R 1 = W ( q ) ∆ X = n − 1 X q =0 W ( q ) : ,q ∆ X q, : (16) R 2 = ( W (0) − W ( q ) ) e X = n − 1 X q =0 ( W (0) : ,q − W ( q ) : ,q ) e X q, : (17) 5

---

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Algorithm 1 GPTAQ quantization with Compensation-aware Error (CAE) 1: Input: FP weight W , calibration input X , FP input ˜ X , and Block size B 2: W (0) ← W , H ← XX ⊤ , ∆ XX ⊤ ← ( ˜ X − X ) X ⊤ , L = Inverse Cholesky ( H + λ 1 I ) 3: P 1 ←  (∆ XX ⊤ L ) ⊙ M U  L ⊤ , P 2 ←  (( H + ∆ XX ⊤ ) L ) ⊙ M U  L ⊤ 4: Q ← 0 m × n , E ← 0 m × B 5: for i = 0 , B, 2 B, . . . do 6: for j = i, i + 1 , . . . , i + B − 1 do 7: Q : ,j ← quant ( W ( j ) : ,j ) 8: E : ,j − i ← ( W ( j ) : ,j − Q : ,j ) / L jj 9: W : ,j :( i + B ) ← W : ,j :( i + B ) − E : ,j − i L ⊤ j,j :( i + B ) + W : ,j P 1 j,j :( i + B ) + ( W (0) : ,j − W ( j ) : ,j ) P 2 j,j :( i + B ) 10: end for 11: W : , ( i + B ): ← W : , ( i + B ): − E · L ⊤ i :( i + B ) , ( i + B ): + W : ,i :( i + B ) P 1 i :( i + B ) , ( i + B ): + ( W (0) : ,i :( i + B ) − W : ,i :( i + B ) ) P 2 i :( i + B ) , ( i + B ): 12: end for Hence, we can quantize the q-th column while only focusing on its associated residual error. With neuron decomposition, the objective in Eqn. 12 becomes: min ∆ W : ,q : || ∆ W : ,q : X q : , : − W ( q ) : ,q ∆ X q, : − ( W (0) : ,q − W ( q ) : ,q ) e X q, : || 2 F s.t. ∆ W : ,q e ⊤ q + W ( q ) : ,q − c W ( q ) : ,q = 0 , (18) And the corresponding weight update becomes: ∆ W : ,q : = ( c W ( q ) : ,q − W ( q ) : ,q ) ˜ H − 1 qq · ( ˜ H − 1 q, : )+ W ( q ) : ,q ∆ X q, : X ⊤ : ,q : ˜ H − 1 − q +( W (0) : ,q − W ( q ) : ,q ) e X q, : X ⊤ : ,q : ˜ H − 1 − q . (19) Following GPTAQ, we can formulate P 1 q, : = ∆ X q, : X ⊤ : ,q : ˜ H − 1 − q and P 2 q, : = e X q, : X ⊤ : ,q : ˜ H − 1 − q for efficient computation. The matrix P 1 and P 2 can be precomputed in one line. P 1 =  (∆ XX ⊤ L ) ⊙ M U  L ⊤ , P 2 =  ( e XX ⊤ L ) ⊙ M U  L ⊤ (20) Proof is provided in GPTAQ paper as well as Appendix A.3. We even don’t need to explictly store e XX ⊤ since e XX ⊤ = XX ⊤ + ∆ XX ⊤ . Therefore, Eqn. 19 can be written as ∆ W : ,q : = ( c W ( q ) : ,q − W ( q ) : ,q ) ˜ H − 1 qq · ( ˜ H − 1 q, : ) + W ( q ) : ,q P 1 q,q : + ( W (0) : ,q − W ( q ) : ,q ) P 2 q,q : (21) Just like GPTQ and GPTAQ, the quantization results for column q are only affected by updates performed on this column, and updates to later columns are irrelevant at this point. Therefore, we can lazily update all terms in Eqn. 21 for better GPU utilization. The full algorithm, GPTAQ combined with compensation-aware error, is summarized in Algorithm 1. Our extensions are marked in orange color. 5 E XPERIMENTS Models & Datasets. We conduct experiments on the Llama 2 (Touvron et al., 2023) and Llama 3 (Meta, 2024) families of models, with scales ranging from 1B to 70B parameters. All models are initialized from publicly available checkpoints obtained from the Hugging Face Hub (Wolf, 2019). We evaluate performance by reporting perplexity on the WikiText-2 (Merity et al., 2016) and C4 (Raffel et al., 2020) datasets. Additionally, we assess zero-shot performance on six downstream 6

---

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Table 1: Performance of 3-bit per-group symmetric weight-only quantization. We report perplexity on Wikitext2 and C4, alongside zero-shot accuracy on six downstream tasks. All models are cali- brated on 128 samples from the C4 dataset following GPTAQ. Model Method Wiki2 ( ↓ ) C4 ( ↓ ) PiQA Arc E Arc C HS WG BoolQ Avg ( ↑ ) L2-7B FP16 5.47 7.26 79.0 74.5 46.3 76.0 69.0 77.7 70.4 AWQ 6.79 8.93 77.1 69.9 41.8 71.2 67.7 71.5 66.3 GPTQ 6.73 13.60 77.3 66.5 39.6 67.8 68.9 69.3 64.9 GPTQ+Ours 6.40 8.34 76.8 70.5 41.2 71.5 68.1 71.0 66.5 GPTAQ 6.53 8.40 77.7 67.4 41.3 72.1 67.6 71.8 66.3 GPTAQ+Ours 6.25 8.19 77.4 69.5 41.5 72.3 67.4 71.5 66.6 L2-13B FP16 4.88 6.73 80.5 77.5 49.2 79.4 72.3 80.6 73.3 AWQ 5.53 7.57 78.6 74.5 46.8 76.2 72.4 76.5 70.9 GPTQ 5.43 7.38 79.2 75.4 47.2 75.9 71.0 79.6 71.4 GPTQ+Ours 5.42 7.37 79.1 76.4 48.1 76.4 72.5 81.2 72.3 GPTAQ 5.42 7.34 79.8 75.8 47.1 76.0 71.2 81.1 71.9 GPTAQ+Ours 5.39 7.34 79.1 76.6 48.4 76.0 71.8 80.9 72.1 L3.2-1B -Instruct FP16 13.16 21.30 74.1 63.1 38.0 60.8 59.4 69.4 60.8 AWQ 36.90 52.66 66.8 51.2 29.8 48.5 53.8 57.0 51.2 GPTQ 21.01 29.14 70.0 55.9 32.9 53.3 57.1 62.9 55.4 GPTQ+Ours 19.61 28.87 70.6 56.4 33.3 54.3 56.4 64.6 55.9 GPTAQ 19.62 27.44 69.4 56.6 32.8 53.1 56.7 63.5 55.3 GPTAQ+Ours 18.32 26.87 69.3 55.6 34.0 55.4 57.9 64.5 56.1 L3-8B FP16 6.14 9.45 80.9 77.7 53.2 79.2 72.9 81.2 74.2 AWQ 9.53 14.74 76.1 69.2 42.2 71.4 69.0 78.2 67.7 GPTQ 8.53 13.28 77.6 70.8 45.9 73.3 71.7 76.5 69.3 GPTQ+Ours 8.00 12.53 77.4 68.4 43.4 74.1 71.9 78.8 69.0 GPTAQ 8.39 12.96 76.9 72.1 45.0 70.1 71.0 77.9 68.8 GPTAQ+Ours 7.77 12.25 77.7 73.8 45.7 74.6 72.3 79.1 70.5 L3.1-8B -Instruct FP16 7.21 11.39 80.9 79.6 54.8 79.1 74.1 83.9 75.4 AWQ 10.50 16.62 77.3 65.1 44.7 72.5 69.5 80.7 68.3 GPTQ 9.06 14.15 76.0 71.3 45.4 74.4 71.7 83.0 70.3 GPTQ+Ours 8.96 13.97 78.0 76.3 50.3 74.7 73.4 83.5 72.7 GPTAQ 8.90 13.85 76.9 70.5 46.0 74.5 71.7 81.5 70.3 GPTAQ+Ours 8.67 13.79 78.6 76.2 50.0 75.1 72.7 81.3 72.3 L3-70B FP16 2.85 7.17 84.4 86.0 64.3 85.0 80.8 85.4 81.0 AWQ 5.36 9.13 82.4 79.2 57.0 81.3 77.8 84.5 77.0 GPTQ 5.16 9.23 81.9 81.5 57.9 81.7 78.0 83.9 77.5 GPTQ+Ours 5.03 8.95 82.3 82.2 57.3 82.6 78.4 83.5 77.7 GPTAQ 6.58 10.73 79.8 79.0 53.8 79.0 74.0 82.5 74.7 GPTAQ+Ours 6.32 10.69 81.7 80.4 54.3 77.3 74.1 77.9 74.4 tasks: PiQA (Bisk et al., 2020), ARC Easy/Challenge (Clark et al., 2018), HellaSwag (Zellers et al., 2019), Winogrande (Sakaguchi et al., 2021), and BoolQ (Clark et al., 2019). Setup. Our method is implemented in PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019). We use per-group symmetric quantization (g128) for weights and per-token asymmetric quantization for activations. Our calibra- tion process follows the setup of GPTAQ (Li et al., 2025).The clipping ratio for input activations is set to 0.9 as suggested in (Ashkboos et al., 2024), while the weight clipping range is searched by minimizing the mean squared error (Frantar et al., 2022). The calibration set consists of 128 samples of 2048 tokens from Wikitext2 or C4, specified in each quantization setting. Quantization for the 70B models is performed on a single NVIDIA H20 GPU with 96GB of memory, whereas all other models are quantized on a single NVIDIA A6000 GPU with 48GB of memory. 7

---

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Table 2: Performance of 2-bit per-group symmetric weight-only quantization with rotation (QuaRot (Ashkboos et al., 2024)). We report perplexity on Wikitext2 and C4, alongside average zero-shot accuracy. All models are calibrated on the Wikitext2 dataset following GPTAQ. Precision Method L3.1-8B-Inst L3-70B L2-7B L2-13B Wiki2 C4 Acc Wiki2 C4 Acc Wiki2 C4 Acc Wiki2 C4 Acc W2A16 FP16 7.21 13.01 75.4 2.85 7.17 81.0 5.47 7.26 70.4 4.88 6.73 73.2 QuaRot+GPTQ 19.8 53.6 50.7 30.9 62.6 45.2 19.0 36.4 45.0 10.8 21.9 50.5 QuaRot+GPTAQ 13.9 33.6 54.7 11.0 32.8 58.3 9.5 19.5 51.5 7.5 13.9 55.8 QuaRot+GPTAQ+Ours 13.6 34.2 55.9 10.5 32.1 59.0 8.9 18.3 54.0 7.3 13.6 58.2 5.1 W EIGHT -O NLY Q UANTIZATION We first evaluate our method in the weight-only quantization setting, a standard benchmark es- tablished by methods like GPTQ. Following established practices in GPTQ and GPTAQ, we en- able act order , which improves performance by sorting weight columns based on the Hessian diagonal magnitude. We additionally compare our method against another strong PTQ method, AWQ (Lin et al., 2023). Table 1 presents the detailed results for 3-bit quantization. By integrat- ing our Compensation-aware Error (CAE) term into GPTQ and GPTAQ, we observe significant and consistent improvements in both perplexity and zero-shot task accuracy. For instance, integrating CAE with GPTQ on the Llama2-7B model drastically reduces C4 perplexity from 13.60 to 8.34, while increasing the average downstream accuracy from 64.9% to 66.5%. Similarly, when applied to GPTAQ, our method increases the average accuracy of the Llama3.1-8B-Instruct model from 70.3% to 72.3%. These substantial gains, observed consistently across diverse model families and scales, underscore the broad effectiveness and applicability of our proposed method. To assess the robustness of our method under extreme compression, we extend our evaluation to the more challenging 2-bit quantization scenario. To mitigate the inherent difficulty of this setting, we incorporate QuaRot (Ashkboos et al., 2024), a training-free weight rotation technique. As shown in Table 2, our method yields significant performance improvements even when integrated with baselines already enhanced by the QuaRot technique. For example, on the Llama2-13B model, our approach further reduces Wikitext2 perplexity from 7.50 to 7.32 and improves the average accuracy from 55.8% to 58.2% over the QuaRot+GPTAQ baseline. These results provide strong evidence that our proposed error term more accurately models and compensates for the complex errors introduced by low-bit quantization, thereby recovering model performance under these stringent conditions. 5.2 W EIGHT -A CTIVATION Q UANTIZATION To further validate the efficacy of our method, we extend our evaluation to the challenging weight-and-activation quantization setting. To address the significant performance degradation caused by activation outliers, we incorporate two rotation-based transformations: the tuning-free QuaRot (Ashkboos et al., 2024) and the optimized SpinQuant (Liu et al., 2024). For SpinQuant, we directly utilize the official pre-trained rotation matrices without additional fine-tuning. Given GP- TAQ’s superior performance when activation is quantized, we primarily evaluate the performance of GPTAQ+Ours. The results for GPTQ+Ours are deferred to Appendix A.4. As presented in Table 3, integrating our method with these advanced baselines yields superior performance across most eval- uations in the stringent W2A4KV4 scenario. On the Llama2-13B model, our approach achieves a significant advantage, reducing Wikitext2 perplexity from 9.55 (SpinQuant+GPTAQ) to 8.60, while increasing the average downstream task accuracy from 50.2% to 52.2%. Similar performance gains are observed on the Llama2-7B model, where perplexity decreases from 11.6 to 11.1 and average accuracy increases from 48.1% to 49.2%. For the Llama3-8B model, our method achieves 1.3% higher average accuracy compared to Quarot+GPTAQ. A notable finding emerges from our experiments on Llama3-70B. We observe that while QuaRot- based methods remain stable, SpinQuant-based approaches suffer from catastrophic performance degradation (Perplexity > 1e5). We hypothesize that this failure stems from the pre-trained ro- tation matrix. As it is optimized under a W16A4KV4 setting, it cannot adapt to the substantial distribution shifts induced by 2-bit weight quantization. Overall, these results indicate that our pro- 8

---

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Table 3: Performance of W2A4KV4 quantization. We report perplexity on Wikitext2 and C4, along- side zero-shot accuracy on six downstream tasks. All models are calibrated on 128 samples from the Wikitext2 dataset following GPTAQ. Model Method Wiki2 ( ↓ ) C4 ( ↓ ) PiQA Arc E Arc C HS WG BoolQ Avg ( ↑ ) L2-7B FP16 5.47 7.26 79.0 74.5 46.3 76.0 69.0 77.7 70.4 SpinQ+GPTQ 31.9 61.3 57.1 34.9 23.6 33.2 53.7 61.4 44.0 SpinQ+GPTAQ 11.6 26.5 62.2 42.3 25.5 40.9 54.7 63.4 48.1 SpinQ+GPTAQ+Ours 11.1 24.7 62.7 45.4 27.6 42.3 55.0 62.3 49.2 Quarot+GPTQ 30.0 48.9 55.7 35.2 23.9 32.4 50.6 61.8 43.4 Quarot+GPTAQ 11.7 24.8 62.3 45.6 25.6 41.2 54.0 62.4 48.5 Quarot+GPTAQ+Ours 11.5 23.6 63.6 46.4 24.9 40.8 56.0 61.9 48.9 L2-13B FP16 4.88 6.73 80.5 77.5 49.2 79.4 72.3 80.6 73.3 DuQuant+LWC 16.4 - 58.7 37.3 24.9 41.5 53.3 62.0 46.2 SpinQ+GPTQ 13.3 33.6 59.0 39.5 24.9 40.3 52.6 61.4 46.3 SpinQ+GPTAQ 9.55 62.1 62.3 44.6 27.8 48.0 55.0 63.6 50.2 SpinQ+GPTAQ+Ours 8.60 20.3 63.4 48.7 29.1 51.2 56.8 64.1 52.2 Quarot+GPTQ 12.5 26.1 61.6 45.7 27.0 44.0 55.8 62.3 49.4 Quarot+GPTAQ 8.89 17.2 65.3 47.2 27.3 48.5 57.7 63.0 51.5 Quarot+GPTAQ+Ours 8.61 16.5 66.5 44.0 30.1 48.9 58.9 63.2 51.9 L3-8B FP16 6.14 9.45 80.9 77.7 53.2 79.2 72.9 81.2 74.2 DuQuant+LWC 4e4 - 51.3 26.1 25.6 25.5 49.3 37.9 35.6 SpinQ+GPTQ 46.9 163 51.5 25.5 25.6 33.1 51.7 57.6 40.8 SpinQ+GPTAQ 18.3 55.6 61.4 42.3 26.6 40.1 54.7 62.7 47.9 SpinQ+GPTAQ+Ours 18.1 53.7 60.6 41.4 28.1 40.8 54.1 62.1 47.9 Quarot+GPTQ 45.2 88.7 55.4 34.7 20.7 31.4 49.7 44.3 39.4 Quarot+GPTAQ 23.0 62.8 55.8 37.2 22.3 36.5 50.4 59.3 43.6 Quarot+GPTAQ+Ours 22.1 61.5 56.0 38.5 24.6 35.8 53.5 60.9 44.9 L3-70B FP16 2.85 7.17 84.4 86.0 64.3 85.0 80.8 85.4 81.0 SpinQ+GPTQ 6378 > 1e5 53.7 31.0 23.8 27.8 51.3 46.7 39.0 SpinQ+GPTAQ 5004 > 1e5 52.7 27.4 26.0 29.9 52.4 49.6 39.6 SpinQ+GPTAQ+Ours 3282 5e4 52.2 26.1 26.4 30.2 52.8 50.8 39.9 Quarot+GPTQ 56.2 91.6 54.3 30.8 19.5 30.3 50.8 56.6 40.4 Quarot+GPTAQ 30.1 57.0 57.5 35.1 23.1 31.9 51.8 60.8 43.3 Quarot+GPTAQ+Ours 26.5 49.5 57.4 37.0 22.2 32.7 50.3 61.1 43.5 Table 4: Ablation study of ∆ W s. We report perplexity and average zero-shot Accuracy. Precision Method ∆ W L2-7B L2-13B Wiki2 C4 Acc Wiki2 C4 Acc W2A16 GPTQ E : ,q L T q,q : 19.0 36.5 44.9 10.8 21.9 50.5 GPTQ+Ours E : ,q L T q,q : + ( W (0) : ,q − W ( q ) : ,q ) P 2 q,q : 17.9 35.4 47.5 9.7 19.8 54.3 GPTAQ E : ,q L T q,q : + W ( q ) : ,q P 1 q,q : 9.5 19.5 51.5 7.5 13.9 55.8 GPTAQ+Ours E : ,q L T q,q : + W ( q ) : ,q P 1 q,q : + ( W (0) : ,q − W ( q ) : ,q ) P 2 q,q : 8.9 18.3 54.0 7.3 13.6 58.2 posed compensation-aware error remains effective at addressing the complex errors introduced by simultaneous weight and activation quantization, robustly lowering model perplexity and improving downstream task accuracy. 5.3 A BLATION S TUDY Our proposed weight update, ∆ W , introduces a new term, ( W (0) : ,q − W ( q ) : ,q ) P 2 q,q : , which is designed to account for the discrepancy between the pre-quantization compensated weights and the original weights. To isolate and validate the contribution of our proposed term, we conduct an ablation study by integrating it into two strong baseline frameworks: GPTQ and GPTAQ. While Table 1 already serves as a comprehensive ablation study, here we additionally present the results for extremely low- bit quantization combined with rotation. As presented in Table 4, our term delivers consistent and substantial performance gains when integrated into either framework. When added to GPTQ, our term improves the average accuracy on Llama2-7B from 44.9% to 47.5% and on Llama2-13B from 9

---

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Table 5: GPU Memory (GB) needed to perform calibration (not quantized inference) on LLaMA2- 7B and LLaMA3-70B following the standard setup. ’Peak’ denotes the peak memory usage during the whole calibration process, obtained by the nvitop command. † denotes moving the fp activation cache to cpu. Llama2-7B q proj k proj v proj o proj up proj gate proj down proj Peak m, n 4096 , 4096 4096 , 4096 4096 , 4096 4096 , 4096 11008 , 4096 11008 , 4096 4096 , 11008 GPTQ 0.13GB 0.13GB 0.13GB 0.13GB 0.29GB 0.29GB 0.48GB 8.5GB GPTAQ 0.16GB 0.16GB 0.16GB 0.16GB 0.32GB 0.32GB 0.70GB 19.8/10.1 † GB GPTAQ+Ours 0.25GB 0.25GB 0.25GB 0.25GB 0.52GB 0.52GB 1.11GB 20.6/11.0 † GB Llama3-70B q proj k proj v proj o proj up proj gate proj down proj Peak m, n 8192 , 8192 8192 , 8192 8192 , 8192 8192 , 8192 28672 , 8192 28672 , 8192 8192 , 28672 GPTQ 0.52GB 0.52GB 0.52GB 0.52GB 1.49GB 1.49GB 2.92GB 23.2GB GPTAQ 0.65GB 0.65GB 0.65GB 0.65GB 1.62GB 1.62GB 4.48GB 63.7/35.8 † GB GPTAQ+Ours 1.03GB 1.03GB 1.03GB 1.03GB 2.64GB 2.64GB 6.95GB 69.5/41.5 † GB Table 6: Quantization Time (s) of 3bit weight-only quantization on a single NVIDIA H20 GPU. We report the mean and standard deviation over 4 measurements. Model GPTQ GPTAQ GPTAQ+Ours Llama2-7b 796 ± 10 952 ± 30 1001 ± 12 Llama2-13B 1354 ± 3 1626 ± 11 1728 ± 17 Llama3-70B 4746 ± 120 5883 ± 123 6344 ± 153 50.5% to 54.3%, with corresponding perplexity reductions. This demonstrates that accounting for the compensation error is beneficial even without cross-layer error propagation. More importantly, when combined with GPTAQ, the performance is further enhanced. On Llama2-13B, this combina- tion lowers the Wikitext2 perplexity to 7.3 and increases the average accuracy to 58.2%. This result confirms that our compensation-aware error is complementary to existing residual error terms and that explicitly modeling the error from the weight update process. 5.4 A LGORITHM E FFICIENCY First, regarding calibration memory, the matrix needed for calibration are summarized in Table 10. Our approach (Algorithm 1) mainly introduces additional storage requirements over GPTAQ for two components: W (0) ∈ R m × n and P 2 ∈ R n × n . While this increases the peak memory usage, this overhead is manageable and strictly confined to the offline quantization process. As shown in Table 5, the per-layer memory footprint remains practical for modern hardware. Crucially, the memory footprint of the final quantized model at inference is unaffected. Second, in terms of quantization time, our method incurs a minimal overhead of only ∼ 5% compared to GPTAQ for the end-to-end model quantization process (Table 6). This marginal cost highlights the efficiency of the neuron decomposition technique, which seamlessly integrates the compensation- aware error into the weight update computation with negligible impact on quantization time. No- tably, our method doesn’t incur run-time overhead when inferencing with quantized weights. 6 C ONCLUSION In this work, we analyze and refine the calibration objective in compensation-based quantization methods such as GPTQ and GPTAQ. We establish that the residual error should originate not only from the preceding layer’s output error but also from the discrepancy introduced by the weight compensation process itself. Based on this finding, we introduce the compensation-aware error to the residual error formulation. As demonstrated through extensive experiments, our proposed enhancements are efficiently and seamlessly integrated into existing frameworks and boost their performance. The results confirm that our method consistently and significantly boosts quantization performance across a diverse range of large language models and quantization settings, underscoring the critical impact of precise error modeling in post-training quantization. 10

---

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 A CKNOWLEDGEMENTS This work was supported by the National Science and Technology Major Project (2026ZD1305800), Ningbo Key Research and Development Program (2025Z082), Zhejiang Province’s Leading Talent Project in Science and Technology Innovation (2023R5204), and Zhejiang University - Vivo Infor- mation Technology Joint Research Center. R EFERENCES Saleh Ashkboos, Amirkeivan Mohtashami, Maximilian L Croci, Bo Li, Martin Jaggi, Dan Alistarh, Torsten Hoefler, and James Hensman. Quarot: Outlier-free 4-bit inference in rotated llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.00456 , 2024. Yonatan Bisk, Rowan Zellers, Jianfeng Gao, Yejin Choi, et al. Piqa: Reasoning about physical com- monsense in natural language. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 34, pp. 7432–7439, 2020. Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:1877–1901, 2020. Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, Ming-Wei Chang, Tom Kwiatkowski, Michael Collins, and Kristina Toutanova. Boolq: Exploring the surprising difficulty of natural yes/no questions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.10044 , 2019. Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, and Oyvind Tafjord. Think you have solved question answering? try arc, the ai2 reasoning challenge. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05457 , 2018. DeepSeek-AI. Deepseek llm: Scaling open-source language models with longtermism, 2024. Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database. 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 248–255, 2009. Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Younes Belkada, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Llm. int8 (): 8-bit matrix multiplication for transformers at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.07339 , 2022. Yifu Ding, Haotong Qin, Qinghua Yan, Zhenhua Chai, Junjie Liu, Xiaolin Wei, and Xianglong Liu. Towards accurate post-training quantization for vision transformer. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM international conference on multimedia , pp. 5380–5388, 2022. Jinze Bai et al. Qwen technical report, 2023. Elias Frantar and Dan Alistarh. Optimal brain compression: A framework for accurate post-training quantization and pruning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:4475–4488, 2022. Elias Frantar, Saleh Ashkboos, Torsten Hoefler, and Dan Alistarh. Gptq: Accurate post-training quantization for generative pre-trained transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.17323 , 2022. Amir Gholami, Sehoon Kim, Zhen Dong, Zhewei Yao, Michael W Mahoney, and Kurt Keutzer. A survey of quantization methods for efficient neural network inference. In Low-Power Computer Vision , pp. 291–326. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2022. Babak Hassibi, David G Stork, and Gregory J Wolff. Optimal brain surgeon and general network pruning. In IEEE international conference on neural networks , pp. 293–299. IEEE, 1993. Benoit Jacob, Skirmantas Kligys, Bo Chen, Menglong Zhu, Matthew Tang, Andrew Howard, Hartwig Adam, and Dmitry Kalenichenko. Quantization and training of neural networks for efficient integer-arithmetic-only inference. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 2704–2713, 2018. 11

---

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Yann LeCun, John Denker, and Sara Solla. Optimal brain damage. Advances in neural information processing systems , 2, 1989. Yuhang Li, Ruokai Yin, Donghyun Lee, Shiting Xiao, and Priyadarshini Panda. Gptaq: Efficient finetuning-free quantization for asymmetric calibration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.02692 , 2025. Zhikai Li, Junrui Xiao, Lianwei Yang, and Qingyi Gu. Repq-vit: Scale reparameterization for post-training quantization of vision transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pp. 17227–17236, 2023. Ji Lin, Jiaming Tang, Haotian Tang, Shang Yang, Xingyu Dang, and Song Han. Awq: Activation-aware weight quantization for llm compression and acceleration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00978 , 2023. Zechun Liu, Changsheng Zhao, Igor Fedorov, Bilge Soran, Dhruv Choudhary, Raghuraman Krish- namoorthi, Vikas Chandra, Yuandong Tian, and Tijmen Blankevoort. Spinquant–llm quantization with learned rotations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16406 , 2024. Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and Richard Socher. Pointer sentinel mixture models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.07843 , 2016. Meta. Introducing llama 3.1: Our most capable models to date, 2024. URL https://ai.meta. com/blog/meta-llama-3-1/ . Markus Nagel, Marios Fournarakis, Rana Ali Amjad, Yelysei Bondarenko, Mart Van Baalen, and Tijmen Blankevoort. A white paper on neural network quantization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.08295 , 2021. OpenAI. Chatgpt. https://openai.com/chatgpt , 2022. Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high- performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. The Journal of Machine Learning Research , 21(1):5485–5551, 2020. Keisuke Sakaguchi, Ronan Le Bras, Chandra Bhagavatula, and Yejin Choi. Winogrande: An adver- sarial winograd schema challenge at scale. Communications of the ACM , 64(9):99–106, 2021. Wenqi Shao, Mengzhao Chen, Zhaoyang Zhang, Peng Xu, Lirui Zhao, Zhiqian Li, Kaipeng Zhang, Peng Gao, Yu Qiao, and Ping Luo. Omniquant: Omnidirectionally calibrated quantization for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.13137 , 2023. Gemini Team. Gemini: A family of highly capable multimodal models, 2023. Hugo Touvron, Matthieu Cord, Matthijs Douze, Francisco Massa, Alexandre Sablayrolles, and Herv´ e J´ egou. Training data-efficient image transformers & distillation through attention. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 10347–10357. PMLR, 2021. Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko- lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda- tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288 , 2023. Albert Tseng, Jerry Chee, Qingyao Sun, Volodymyr Kuleshov, and Christopher De Sa. Quip#: Even better llm quantization with hadamard incoherence and lattice codebooks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.04396 , 2024. A Vaswani. Attention is all you need. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2017. T Wolf. Huggingface’s transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03771 , 2019. xAI. Grok-1. https://github.com/xai-org/grok-1 , 2024. 12

---

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Guangxuan Xiao, Ji Lin, Mickael Seznec, Hao Wu, Julien Demouth, and Song Han. Smoothquant: Accurate and efficient post-training quantization for large language models. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 38087–38099. PMLR, 2023. Zhihang Yuan, Lin Niu, Jiawei Liu, Wenyu Liu, Xinggang Wang, Yuzhang Shang, Guangyu Sun, Qiang Wu, Jiaxiang Wu, and Bingzhe Wu. Rptq: Reorder-based post-training quantization for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.01089 , 2023. Rowan Zellers, Ari Holtzman, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. Hellaswag: Can a ma- chine really finish your sentence? arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.07830 , 2019. 13

---

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 A A PPENDIX A.1 I NTEGRATION OF OUR METHOD WITH GPTQ Since our focus is on the residual error introduced by weight compensation—an error present in both GPTQ and GPTAQ—it is still sufficient to incorporate the P2 term into the weight compensation. Therefore, our method can be integrated with both GPTQ and GPTAQ. GPTQ consistently uses the input to the quantized model, X , as its input, which means ∆ X = 0 , eliminating the need for the P1 term. The detailed process is illustrated in algorithm 2. Algorithm 2 GPTQ quantization with Compensation-aware Error 1: Input: FP weight W , calibration input X , and Block size B 2: W (0) ← W , H ← XX ⊤ , ∆ XX ⊤ ← ( ˜ X − X ) X ⊤ , L = Inverse Cholesky ( H + λ 1 I ) 3: P 2 ←  (( H + ∆ XX ⊤ ) L ) ⊙ M U  L ⊤ 4: Q ← 0 m × n , E ← 0 m × B 5: for i = 0 , B, 2 B, . . . do 6: for j = i, i + 1 , . . . , i + B − 1 do 7: Q : ,j ← quant ( W ( j ) : ,j ) 8: E : ,j − i ← ( W ( j ) : ,j − Q : ,j ) / L jj 9: W ( j +1) : ,j :( i + B ) ← W ( j ) : ,j :( i + B ) − E : ,j − i L ⊤ j,j :( i + B ) + ( W (0) : ,j − W ( j ) : ,j ) P 2 j,j :( i + B ) 10: end for 11: W : , ( i + B ): ← W : , ( i + B ): − E · L ⊤ i :( i + B ) , ( i + B ): + ( W (0) : ,i :( i + B ) − W : ,i :( i + B ) ) P 2 i :( i + B ) , ( i + B ): 12: end for A.2 A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON V ISION T RANSFORMER To evaluate the generalizability of our method beyond language models, we conduct experiments on Vision Transformers. We use DeiT-Tiny, DeiT-Small, and DeiT-Base models (Touvron et al., 2021) and select 128 samples from the ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) training dataset for calibration data. The compared baselines include recent post-training quantization methods such as APQ-ViT (Ding et al., 2022), RepQ-ViT (Li et al., 2023), GPTQ (Frantar et al., 2022), and GPTAQ (Li et al., 2025). For all compensation-based methods (GPTQ, GPTAQ, and Ours), we utilize the act order option to sort weight columns by Hessian magnitude, as this proves beneficial for performance. We test under both W4A4 and the more challenging W2A4 quantization settings. The results are presented in Table 7. Under W4A4 quantization, our method achieves highly com- petitive performance across all models. On DeiT-Small, our approach reaches 74.0% accuracy, out- performing the strong GPTAQ baseline. The advantages of our method become more pronounced in the lower-precision W2A4 setting. For DeiT-Base, our approach improves the accuracy to 62.1%, a notable gain over both GPTQ (51.8%) and GPTAQ (61.3%). These results on vision transformers confirm that our proposed compensation-aware error formulation is effective and robust, providing consistent performance improvements even in highly compressed, non-linguistic models. Table 7: Quantization results of Vision Transformers on ImageNet (accuracy ↑ ). We evaluate three DeiT models under W4A4 and W2A4 quantization. Model FP16 W4A4 W2A4 - APQ-ViT RepQ-ViT GPTQ GPTAQ Ours GPTQ GPTAQ Ours DeiT-Tiny 72.0 - - 64.5 65.6 65.7 27.5 26.8 27.8 DeiT-Small 79.8 34.1 71.8 69.0 73.8 74.0 40.4 45.7 46.5 DeiT-Base 81.3 64.4 75.6 77.6 78.1 78.0 51.8 61.3 62.1 14

---

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Table 8: Additional results of W2A4KV4 quantization. We report perplexity on Wikitext2 and C4, alongside zero-shot accuracy on six downstream tasks. All models are calibrated on 128 samples from the Wikitext2 dataset. Model Method Wiki2 ( ↓ ) C4 ( ↓ ) PiQA Arc E Arc C HS WG BoolQ Avg ( ↑ ) L2-7B FP16 5.47 7.26 79.0 74.5 46.3 76.0 69.0 77.7 70.4 SpinQ+GPTQ 31.9 61.3 57.1 34.9 23.6 33.2 53.7 61.4 44.0 SpinQ+GPTQ+Ours 23.8 44.3 57.7 35.5 23.6 35.0 53.0 56.6 43.8 L3-8B FP16 5.47 7.26 79.0 74.5 46.3 76.0 69.0 77.7 70.4 SpinQ+GPTQ 46.9 163 51.5 25.5 25.6 33.1 51.7 57.6 40.8 SpinQ+GPTQ+Ours 24.3 80.0 57.3 39.5 24.4 35.7 52.2 57.8 44.4 L2-13B FP16 4.88 6.73 80.5 77.5 49.2 79.4 72.3 80.6 73.3 SpinQ+GPTQ 13.3 33.6 59.0 39.5 24.9 40.3 52.6 61.4 46.3 SpinQ+GPTQ+Ours 11.7 25.4 62.8 45.5 26.4 44.1 55.8 62.3 49.5 A.3 P ROOF OF PRECOMPUTION P A complete proof is provided in the GPTAQ paper. Here, we briefly recapitulate it using the compu- tation of P 1 as an example. For any further questions, we refer the reader to the proof in Appendix A.3 of the GPTAQ paper. Proof. We derive P1 row-wise. Starting from the expression P 1 i, : = ∆ X i, : X ⊤ L i +1: ,i +1: L ⊤ i +1: ,i +1: , note that L ⊤ i +1: ,i +1: has support only in columns j > i . Thus, P1 i , j = 0 for i ≥ j , and for i < j , P 1 i,j = j X a = i +1 O i,a L ⊤ a,j , where O i,a := (∆ X i, : X ⊤ L i +1: ,i +1: ) a . Since L i +1: ,i +1: is zero in columns a ≤ i , we have O i,a = 0 for a ≤ i , and for a > i , O i,a = n X b = a (∆ XX ⊤ ) i,b L b,a . This means O = (∆ XX ⊤ L ) ⊙ M U , where ⊙ denotes element-wise multiplication and M U masks out the lower triangle (including diagonal). Finally, since O is strictly upper-triangular, multiplying by L ⊤ yields: ( OL ⊤ ) i,j = n X a =1 O i,a L ⊤ a,j = j X a = i +1 O i,a L ⊤ a,j = P i,j , because O i,a = 0 for a ≤ i and L ⊤ a,j = 0 for a > j . Hence, P 1 =   (∆ XX ⊤ L ) ⊙ M U  L ⊤ . The computational efficiency of P 1 stems from the triangular property of L , independent of ∆ X . Analogously, P2 can be computed as: P 2 =  ( e XX ⊤ L ) ⊙ M U  L ⊤ 15

---

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 A.4 A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON WEIGHT-ACTIVATION QUANTIZATION As shown in Table 8, we provide the results of combining our method with GPTQ for weight- activation quantization, as a supplement to Table 3. This further validates the generalizability of our method. A.5 ADDITIONAL RESULTS ON Q WEN MODELS To further illustrate the generalizability of our proposed method, we conducted experiments on the Qwen series models, with results presented in Table 9. On the 4B, 8B, and 14B models, our method achieved significant and stable improvements in both PPL (perplexity) and average accuracy compared to GPTAQ, further validating the generalizability of our approach. Table 9: Performance of 2-bit per-group symmetric weight-only quantization on Qwen3 models. We report perplexity on C4, alongside zero-shot accuracy on six downstream tasks. All models are calibrated on 128 samples from the C4 dataset following GPTAQ. Model Method C4 ( ↓ ) Arc E Arc C HS WG BoolQ PiQA Avg ( ↑ ) Qwen3-4B FP16 19.85 78.5 54.0 68.4 66.1 85.1 74.8 71.2 GPTAQ 57.1 37.6 23.0 34.6 53.1 63.7 61.3 45.6 GPTAQ+Ours 39.9 47.1 28.4 45.1 56.8 70.7 65.3 52.2 Qwen3-8B FP16 15.4 80.9 56.7 74.9 67.8 86.6 77.8 74.1 GPTAQ 32.9 50.5 29.9 45.4 56.8 69.2 65.6 52.9 GPTAQ+Ours 29.9 54.3 29.7 48.4 58.5 71.4 66.5 54.8 Qwen3-14B FP16 13.82 82.8 60.2 78.9 72.8 89.4 79.9 77.3 GPTAQ 21.4 65.0 39.4 61.0 66.4 83.4 74.1 64.9 GPTAQ+Ours 20.9 65.4 40.1 61.2 66.1 83.8 73.6 65.1 We present the sizes (dimensions) of the matrices required for calibration in Table. 10. Table 10: Matrix needed to perform calibration and their sizes. C o and C i denotes the output- channel and input-channel of weights, while b denotes the blocksize for lazy-batch update. Matrix GPTQ GPTAQ GPTAQ+Ours Original weight: W (0) - - C o × C i Compensated weight: W C o × C i C o × C i C o × C i Fake quant weight: Q C o × C i C o × C i C o × C i Cholesky factor: L C i × C i C i × C i C i × C i Precompute 1: P 1 - C i × C i C i × C i Precompute 2: P 2 - - C i × C i In-block weight: W b C o × b C o × b C o × b In-block Error: E b C o × b C o × b C o × b In-block quant weight: Q b C o × b C o × b C o × b In-block cholesky: L b b × b b × b b × b In-block precompute: P b - b × b 2 × b × b 16

---

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Table 11: Performance of 3-bit per-group symmetric weight-only quantization. using different num- bers of calibration samples (64, 96, 128, 192). Lower C4 perplexity and higher average accuracy are better. Model #Samples Method C4 ( ↓ ) Arc E Arc C HS WG BoolQ PiQA Avg ( ↑ ) L2-7B - FP16 7.26 79.0 74.5 46.3 76.0 69.0 77.7 70.4 64 GPTAQ 8.44 68.8 41.9 71.8 67.6 72.4 77.2 66.5 GPTAQ+Ours 8.31 68.4 41.1 72.0 67.6 72.5 77.3 66.6 96 GPTAQ 8.42 68.1 41.7 72.2 67.0 71.9 77.5 66.4 GPTAQ+Ours 8.23 68.9 41.6 72.2 67.2 74.2 77.6 66.9 128 GPTAQ 8.40 67.4 41.3 72.1 67.6 71.8 77.7 66.3 GPTAQ+Ours 8.19 69.5 41.5 72.3 67.4 71.5 77.4 66.6 192 GPTAQ 8.38 67.4 40.7 71.8 68.4 73.4 78.1 66.6 GPTAQ+Ours 8.19 70.0 41.6 72.4 67.7 75.7 78.2 67.6 L3.2-1B -Instruct - FP16 21.3 63.1 38.0 60.8 59.4 69.4 74.1 60.8 64 GPTAQ 28.4 55.8 32.2 53.9 56.4 63.3 69.8 55.2 GPTAQ+Ours 27.7 56.9 33.9 54.7 56.3 64.4 70.4 56.1 96 GPTAQ 27.4 57.1 32.6 53.5 55.6 64.2 68.9 55.3 GPTAQ+Ours 26.8 57.0 31.6 54.8 58.6 63.2 69.4 55.8 128 GPTAQ 27.4 56.6 32.8 53.1 56.7 63.5 69.4 55.3 GPTAQ+Ours 26.9 55.6 34.0 55.4 57.9 64.5 69.3 56.1 192 GPTAQ 27.1 53.2 29.8 54.4 56.3 63.0 67.4 54.0 GPTAQ+Ours 26.9 57.0 33.2 54.8 56.5 63.6 69.5 55.8 L3.1-8B - FP16 9.54 81.1 53.4 78.9 73.5 82.1 81.3 75.1 64 GPTAQ 12.59 75.8 47.8 74.5 72.4 78.8 79.3 71.4 GPTAQ+Ours 12.37 75.7 48.0 74.1 73.2 80.4 78.9 71.7 96 GPTAQ 12.82 73.6 46.3 74.8 70.6 80.2 78.6 70.7 GPTAQ+Ours 12.21 75.1 47.8 74.8 71.4 80.5 79.0 71.4 128 GPTAQ 12.26 74.4 47.8 75.0 72.0 79.4 77.3 71.0 GPTAQ+Ours 12.08 73.7 47.9 75.2 73.2 80.0 79.5 71.6 192 GPTAQ 12.32 76.1 48.1 75.2 71.3 80.4 78.2 71.5 GPTAQ+Ours 12.06 76.8 49.7 74.8 71.7 79.5 78.6 71.8 L3-8B - FP16 9.45 77.7 53.2 79.2 72.9 81.2 80.9 74.2 64 GPTAQ 12.83 73.8 45.0 71.5 70.7 78.0 78.1 69.5 GPTAQ+Ours 12.62 73.2 46.3 73.0 71.2 78.0 78.4 70.0 96 GPTAQ 12.70 72.6 44.8 74.0 71.7 79.3 78.8 70.7 GPTAQ+Ours 12.24 74.5 46.5 75.0 72.2 80.1 78.8 71.2 128 GPTAQ 12.96 72.1 45.0 70.1 71.0 77.9 76.9 68.8 GPTAQ+Ours 12.25 73.8 45.7 74.6 72.3 79.1 77.7 70.5 192 GPTAQ 12.36 72.3 44.2 75.2 72.9 77.1 77.6 69.9 GPTAQ+Ours 12.09 75.6 48.6 75.6 72.1 79.8 79.5 71.9 A.6 A NALYSIS ON SENSITIVITY TO CALIBRATION DATASETS We first analyzed the impact of the number of samples on calibration quality. We conducted vali- dation experiments on four models using 64, 96, 128, and 192 samples, respectively, with a 3-bit per-group weight-only quantization setting. The results are summarized in Table. 11. Our method consistently achieves a stable improvement over GPTAQ, demonstrating its robustness across vary- 17

---

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 ing numbers of calibration samples. Subsequently, we analyzed the influence of the calibration set Table 12: Performance of 3-bit per-group symmetric weight-only quantization. using different cal- ibration datasets. Lower C4 perplexity and higher average accuracy are better. ’red stack’ denotes the stackexange subset of redpajama, and ’red cc’ denotes the commoncrawl subset of redpajama. Model Dataset Method Wiki2 ( ↓ ) C4 ( ↓ ) Arc E Arc C HS WG BoolQ PiQA Avg ( ↑ ) L2-7B - FP16 5.47 7.26 79.0 74.5 46.3 76.0 69.0 77.7 70.4 red stack GPTAQ 6.54 8.75 68.9 39.5 71.0 66.9 71.0 76.4 65.6 GPTAQ+Ours 6.56 8.72 71.0 41.5 71.5 68.1 72.0 77.0 66.8 red cc GPTAQ 6.42 8.56 68.0 42.0 71.7 66.5 74.3 76.6 66.5 GPTAQ+Ours 6.23 8.33 68.2 41.0 71.2 68.0 73.6 76.9 66.6 c4 GPTAQ 6.54 8.38 67.4 40.7 71.8 68.4 73.4 78.1 66.6 GPTAQ+Ours 6.25 8.19 67.0 41.6 72.4 67.7 75.7 78.2 67.6 wiki2 GPTAQ 5.96 9.22 69.2 40.7 71.4 66.0 71.7 76.8 66.0 GPTAQ+Ours 5.93 8.56 71.5 42.2 71.7 68.2 71.4 77.0 67.0 L3-8B - FP16 6.14 9.45 77.7 53.2 79.2 72.9 81.2 80.9 74.2 red stack GPTAQ 10.41 14.56 68.8 42.1 70.8 69.7 74.2 76.3 67.0 GPTAQ+Ours 9.16 14.22 68.9 44.1 71.3 70.0 77.4 76.5 68.0 red cc GPTAQ 7.79 12.95 71.8 45.2 74.2 72.5 77.6 76.2 69.5 GPTAQ+Ours 7.85 12.71 69.6 44.4 74.5 73.0 79.6 77.2 69.7 c4 GPTAQ 8.39 12.96 72.1 45.0 70.1 71.0 77.9 76.9 68.8 GPTAQ+Ours 7.77 12.25 73.8 45.7 74.6 72.3 79.1 77.7 70.5 wiki2 GPTAQ 7.75 13.42 71.5 46.8 72.6 69.7 72.8 77.2 68.4 GPTAQ+Ours 7.43 12.80 73.2 47.4 68.7 73.0 77.0 78.0 69.6 L3.1-8B -Instruct - FP16 7.21 11.39 79.6 54.8 79.1 74.1 83.9 80.9 75.4 red stack GPTAQ 9.87 15.67 72.3 46.2 73.7 71.2 80.3 76.4 70.0 GPTAQ+Ours 9.89 15.55 75.7 49.5 72.8 68.3 80.3 77.8 70.7 red cc GPTAQ 9.07 14.11 66.6 44.5 74.1 72.0 83.0 75.6 69.3 GPTAQ+Ours 8.98 14.11 76.2 48.4 74.3 71.5 82.8 77.1 71.7 c4 GPTAQ 8.90 13.85 70.5 46.0 74.5 71.7 81.5 76.9 70.3 GPTAQ+Ours 8.67 13.79 76.2 50.0 75.1 72.7 81.3 78.6 72.3 wiki2 GPTAQ 8.56 14.47 70.3 45.5 74.8 69.9 83.1 76.1 69.9 GPTAQ+Ours 8.18 14.56 73.6 48.0 74.9 71.5 83.6 77.2 71.4 selection. We validated our approach on three models using four distinct datasets: C4, WikiText-2, RedPajama (CommonCrawl subset), and RedPajama (StackExchange subset), while maintaining the 3-bit per-group weight-only quantization setting. The results are summarized in Table. 12. In most cases, our method demonstrates an improvement over GPTAQ, verifying its robustness to different calibration datasets. A.7 T HE U SE OF LLM S In this paper, Large Language Models (LLMs) were used to assist with polishing the text and for- matting the tables. 18

