arXiv:2505.15909v1 [cs.LG] 21 May 2025 Is (Selective) Round-To-Nearest Quantization All You Need? Alex Kogan Oracle Labs Burlington, MA USA alex.kogan@oracle.com Abstract Quantization became a necessary tool for serv- ing ever-increasing Large Language Models (LLMs). RTN (Round-to-Nearest) is perhaps the simplest quantization technique that has been around well before LLMs surged to the forefront of machine learning (ML) research. Yet, it has been largely dismissed by recent and more advanced quantization methods that claim superiority over RTN in nearly every aspect of performance. This work aims to dispel this es- tablished point of view, showing that RTN is not only much cheaper to apply, but also its token generation throughput can be better than and accuracy can be similar to more advanced alternatives. In particular, we discuss our imple- mentation of RTN based on the recent Marlin kernels and demonstrate how the accuracy of RTN can be gradually improved by selectively increasing the data precision format of certain model layers and modules. Based on our re- sults, we argue that RTN presents a viable and practical choice for quantizing LLMs. 1 Introduction LLM inference is an expensive process because large models require expensive machines with a large amount of high bandwidth memory (HBM). In fact, some of the largest models available today, such as Llama3.1-405B (Meta, 2024) or DeepSeek V3/R1 with their 671B parameters (DeepSeek-AI, 2025), do not even fit into one powerful server with 8 Nvidia H100 GPUs with 80GB HBM each. Fur- thermore, LLM inference, especially if it involves a generative model such as Llama, is wasteful be- cause the token generation is a sequential process, producing new tokens one after another. As such, the computation involved in token generation is comprised of vector by matrix multiplications that do not allow much data to be reused once it is brought from memory to computing units. Con- sequently, the generation process is known to be memory-bound (Frantar et al., 2024; Agrawal et al., 2024; Kwon et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2024), leaving all those powerful GPUs underutilized. Over the past few years, quantization has emerged as de-facto the standard way of tackling both aforementioned issues. During a quantiza- tion process, model weights (and/or activations) are compressed into lower precision (e.g., from 16 bits down to 4 bits), therefore resulting in a smaller memory footprint for the model. This, in turn, leads to reduced hardware requirements for inference and, arguably, to a more efficient token generation process. Due to its practical importance, quantization of LLMs has attracted lots of interest in the research community. This lead to a number of impressive results, with methods like GPTQ (Frantar et al., 2022), AWQ (Lin et al., 2024), SmoothQuant (Xiao et al., 2023), QQQ (Zhang et al., 2024) and many others, each aiming to produce a highly com- pressed model that is accurate and fast during in- ference. Those advanced techniques often dismiss or claim superiority over another simple quanti- zation method that has been around well before LLMs came to exist (Krishnamoorthi, 2018; Gho- lami et al., 2021). This method is RTN or Round- to-Nearest, which involves scaling given model weights and, as its name suggests, rounding the result to the nearest integer. A few favorable characteristics help RTN to stand out from other, more advanced quantization techniques, making it a desirable choice for quan- tizing LLMs. First, unlike most other quantization methods, it is data-free (Tang et al., 2023), i.e., it does not require any calibration data nor a corre- sponding calibration process. As such, RTN can be applied on-the-fly (i.e., while loading a model), and its application is fast (a few milliseconds or seconds, depending on the size of the model) and cheap. Second, RTN can be applied to a model even on a machine that cannot fit the original (non- quantized) model in its GPU memory. For instance, 1

---

we can use a server with 4 Nvidia H100 GPUs to load, quantize with RTN and run inference on the Llama3.1-405B model. At the same time, RTN is often believed to lag behind more advanced quan- tization techniques in two crucial areas – accu- racy (Frantar et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024) and generation latency. In this paper, we tackle both those issues. First, through extensive evaluation we show that the re- covery rate of RTN (i.e., its accuracy across various tasks compared to the baseline model) 1. is perfect when a model is quantized to 8 bits. 2. is nearly perfect and on-par with other, more sophisticated quantization techniques on an extremely large model quantized to 4 bits. 3. falls behind on moderate and small scale mod- els quantized to 4 bits. Focusing on the last case, we investigate selective quantization , in which certain layers of the Trans- former stack of a given model are selected to be quantized to a different precision, and show the efficiency of this approach in recovering most ac- curacy loss for RTN. In particular, we show that leaving just a part of one layer of Llama-3.1 70B model in 8 bit precision, while quantizing the rest of that layer and all other 79 layers into 4 bits leads to nearly perfect recovery rate. Note that this adds less than 0 . 05 bits per weight on average, resulting in only insignificant memory increase. Second, we utilize recent Marlin kernels (Frantar et al., 2024) (developed originally for GPTQ (Fran- tar et al., 2022)) to provide highly efficient imple- mentation for RTN. We integrate those kernels into vLLM (Kwon et al., 2023), a popular framework for serving LLMs, and show that a model quantized with RTN can generate tokens up to 37% faster, relative to the baseline model, when the model is quantized into 4 bits and up to 25% faster when quantized into 8 bits. To the best our knowledge, this is the first example of a data-free quantization technique that produces such savings; moreover, those savings are higher than those achieved with (calibration-data dependent) GPTQ and AWQ, and (data-free) BitsAndBytes (Dettmers et al., 2022). 2 Related Work 2.1 Post-training Quantization Unlike quantization-aware training (QAT) strate- gies that typically come with a high training cost (Huang et al., 2024; Zhu et al., 2024), post- training quantization (PTQ) offers cheap, accurate and performant methods to reducing the size of LLMs. The majority of PTQ methods require cal- ibration data, which they use to find optimal val- ues, i.e., values that reduce a rounding error in- troduced when decreasing the number of bits rep- resenting model weights and/or activations. For instance, AWQ uses calibration data to find salient weights, which it then scales with factors computed to minimize the the mean-squared error of quan- tization (Lin et al., 2024). GPTQ uses calibration data to calculate inverse Hessian matrix employed to find quantized weights (Frantar et al., 2022). The QQQ method (Zhang et al., 2024) uses calibration data twice, once to identify and selectively smooth activation channels that contain outliers, similarly to (Xiao et al., 2023), and then to calculate the in- verse Hessian matrix similarly to (Frantar et al., 2022). Calibration data-dependent quantization has sev- eral drawbacks. First, as noted by Tang et al. (Tang et al., 2023) and demonstrated by Wu et al. (Wu et al., 2023), it might weaken the ability of LLMs to generalize as it introduces the risk of overfitting to the data selected for calibration. Second, it re- quires a separate process for applying quantization, which results in a separate set of (quantized) model weights. This makes the application of quantiza- tion more cumbersome in practice. Third, this pro- cess, albeit much shorter than model pre-training or even fine-tuning, still requires non-trivial resources, such as several hours or even days of GPU time; moreover, it requires at least the number of GPUs with enough HBM to load the original model. Several papers do offer data-free quantization techniques (Xiao et al., 2023; Dettmers et al., 2022; Tang et al., 2023). Their common theme is to sep- arate outliers (weights whose magnitude is sig- nificantly large, e.g., more than 6 . 0 (Dettmers et al., 2022)) from other weights; the outliers are then kept in full precision while the rest of the model is quantized either with uniform (RTN-like) (Dettmers et al., 2022) or non-uniform method (Xiao et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2023). While the number of outliers is typically small and has a negligible impact on the size of the quantized model, their special treatment adds computational overhead, leading to increased token generation la- tency. We demonstrate that by including the results of the BitsAndBytes quantization (Dettmers et al., 2022) in our evaluation. 2

---

Selective quantization maintains model weights in multiple data formats (e.g., FP16, INT8 and INT4). As such, it can be considered related to prior work on mixed-precision quantization, e.g., (Dong et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2024). In fact, some of the aforementioned data-free meth- ods also belong to this group, as they store out- liers and non-outliers in different precision. Unlike prior work, however, selective quantization does not require model retraining or fine-tuning (Dong et al., 2019) nor occasional re-quantization during inference (Chen et al., 2024). Generally speaking, selective quantization is more coarse-grained and simpler than most prior methods, which signifi- cantly simplifies its integration into an inference framework in practice. 2.2 RTN Round-to-nearest (RTN) quantization is, perhaps, the simplest quantization technique known well before large language models came to exist (Krish- namoorthi, 2018; Gholami et al., 2021). RTN is applied on a vector of real values in a floating point format (e.g., FP16 or BFloat16) by dividing each value in the vector by a scaling factor, rounding the result to the nearest integer (hence, the name of this method) and truncating, if necessary, the final integer number so it fits into the target range of values (e.g., [-128, 127] for INT8 or [-8, 7] for INT4). This method is summarized by the follow- ing simple formula: RT N ( r ) = Int ( r/S ) , (1) where r is a vector of input values, S is a scaling factor and Int is a function that maps a real value to an integer value through round-to-nearest and truncate operations. We note that we describe a symmetric variant for RTN; an asymmetric vari- ant, more suitable for input values that are not dis- tributed around zero, subtracts an arbitrary integer zero point from the result of the Int function (Gho- lami et al., 2021). Now we turn our attention to how the scaling factor S is chosen. The scaling factor essentially maps given real values into a partition in a range of integers, where the size of the range is set by the number of bits in the target precision. In the symmetric formulation of RTN, S is set according to the following formula: S = 2 max ( | r | ) 2 b − 1 = max ( | r | ) 2 b − 1 − 0 . 5 , (2) where max ( | r | ) calculates the maximum absolute value in the given input and b is the target precision bit width. As described, RTN is oblivious to the size of the input vector r , however, choosing the “right” size for the vector has important practical implications. Large vectors result in quantized models being sus- ceptible to a significant accuracy loss due to the presence of outliers in the input data (An et al., 2025; Tang et al., 2023; Dettmers et al., 2022), which tend to reduce the quantization resolution by skewing the scaling factor. Hence, the common ap- proach (also used in this paper) splits each weights tensor along its channels and then each channel is split into groups of g values; RTN is applied separately to each group. This sub-channel-wise application contains outliers better (now their im- pact is limited to a group of g numbers rather than the entire channel/tensor), but elevates the memory cost as it requires storing more scaling factors. g is typically set to 2 n , with n = 7 being seemingly a popular choice (Frantar et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024). We note that the issue of dealing with out- liers in the input is far from being unique to RTN, and in fact, is in the heart of most quantization techniques for LLMs (Xiao et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2023; Dettmers et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2024); likewise, refining the application of quantization by splitting input values into small groups is a common technique for improving ac- curacy of quantized models (Frantar et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2024). 2.3 Marlin kernels Marlin kernels (Frantar et al., 2024) have been developed to support high-performance mixed- precision GEMM (general matrix multiplication) operations. Such operations allow multiplying 16 bit activations by 4 or 8 bit weights (commonly referred to as W4A16 or W8A16 in the litera- ture (Zhang et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2024)). A com- mon, but inefficient way of implementing them is by dequantizing the weights first and then ap- plying GEMM in 16bit precision. Marlin hides the overhead of dequantization by effectively over- lapping the data access latency with floating-point operations involved in dequantization and GEMM calculations. It does so through the combination of various techniques, such as an asynchronous mem- ory access and optimized data layout in memory, According to Frantar et al. (Frantar et al., 2024), Marlin achieves close to optimal 4x improvement 3

---

over the 16 bit GEMM calculation for batches of up to 16-32 inputs, which translates to substantial end- to-end inference speedups. Originally developed for the Nvidia’s Ampere architecture and integrated with the GPTQ technique, those kernels have been later extended to support AWQ as well as paved the way to implementing similarly efficient ker- nels (Machete (Wilkinson, 2024)) developed for the more recent Nvidia’s Hopper architecture. 3 Motivation We first evaluate the accuracy of RTN with the tar- get precision of 4 and 8 bits (which we refer to as RTN-8 and RTN-4, respectively), and compare it to the accuracy of other, more advanced quan- tization techniques. We conduct our experiments using the vLLM framework (Kwon et al., 2023) v0.6.4, which we patch to support RTN 1 . For all our experiments, we use one system with 8 Nvidia H100 GPUs with 80GB GPU memory, except for when a model does not fit into memory (e.g., the original Llama3.1-405B model for which we use two such systems). All experiments are run with Python 3.11, PyTorch 2.5.1 and CUDA 12.6. We experiment with Llama models (Meta, 2024) of various sizes as well as with other open-source models, such as Phi, Dolly and Mistral, in or- der to validate our findings beyond Llama mod- els. We use the wikitext dataset (Merity et al., 2016) to measure perplexity and common zero- shot tasks, such as WinoGrande (Sakaguchi et al., 2019), ARC (Clark et al., 2018), TruthfullQA (Lin et al., 2022), CommonSenseQA (Talmor et al., 2019) and PubMedQA (Jin et al., 2019), to measure the accuracy of large language models. For all the experiments, we utilize the open-source lm_eval toolkit (Gao et al., 2024) with its default settings unless specified otherwise. We compare the performance of baseline ver- sions (that utilize BFloat16 or FP16 data format) to the one produced with RTN. We also include results for models quantized with state-of-the-art AWQ (Lin et al., 2024) and GPTQ (Frantar et al., 2022) quantization methods that use INT4 as their target precision (those models are available on Hug- gingFace model hub (Face)) as well as for models quantized on-the-fly with BitsAndBytes (Dettmers et al., 2022) (BnB) to INT4. The results for Llama models are presented in Table 1 (with an extended version available in Ap- 1 We intend to open-source all our changes to vLLM. Llama-3.1 #Bits Method Avg. (6 tasks) ↑ Wikitext ↓ 8B 16 Baseline 66.07 8.64 8 RTN 66.13 8.65 4 RTN 64.32 9.57 4 GPTQ 65.07 9.04 4 AWQ 65.30 9.10 4 BnB 65.59 9.15 70B 16 Baseline 71.67 3.94 8 RTN 71.61 3.95 4 RTN 70.46 8.19 4 GPTQ 70.89 4.61 4 AWQ 71.54 4.58 4 BnB 70.98 7.17 405B 16 Baseline 73.99 1.74 8 RTN 74.12 1.75 4 RTN 73.88 2.08 4 GPTQ 73.31 1.99 4 AWQ 73.81 2.00 4 BnB 73.84 1.95 Llama-3.2 #Bits Method Avg. (6 tasks) ↑ Wikitext ↓ 1B 16 Baseline 51.07 15.82 8 RTN 51.10 15.83 4 RTN 47.96 19.76 4 GPTQ 46.34 17.64 4 AWQ 49.26 17.32 4 BnB 49.01 17.01 3B 16 Baseline 59.26 12.29 8 RTN 59.24 12.31 4 RTN 55.74 13.34 4 GPTQ 57.55 13.16 4 AWQ 57.40 12.69 4 BnB 58.16 12.73 Table 1: Average zero-shot accuracy on six common tasks (the higher is the better) and perplexity measured on the wikitext dataset (the lower is the better), mea- sured with three variants of the Llama3.1 model and two variants of the Llama3.2 model. pendix A). Two important observations can be made: first, RTN-8 achieves full recovery com- pared to the baseline versions. Second, the recov- ery rate of RTN-4 falls behind those achieved by other quantization techniques, unless the model is extremely large (e.g., for Llama 3.1 405B, RTN- 4 performs on par with all other variants, includ- ing the baseline). Those findings motivate the fol- lowing question. Can we quantize only a part of the given model to 8 bit (e.g., the first few layers) and keep the rest in 4 bit precision to achieve full accuracy recovery? While some theoretical and practical evidence exists that applying quantization non-uniformly across different parts of a model is a viable approach (Zhou et al., 2018; Zhu et al., 2018; Han and Han, 2025), we are not aware of any 4

---

0 4 8 12 16 number of layers in INT8 16.0 16.5 17.0 17.5 18.0 18.5 19.0 19.5 perplexity first layers last layers middle layers (a) Llama3.2-1B 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 number of layers in INT8 8.8 9.0 9.2 9.4 9.6 perplexity first layers last layers middle layers (b) Llama3.1-8B 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48 52 56 60 64 68 72 76 80 number of layers in INT8 4 5 6 7 8 perplexity first layers last layers middle layers (c) Llama3.3-70B 0 8 16 24 32 40 48 56 64 72 80 88 96 104 112 120 number of layers in INT8 1.75 1.80 1.85 1.90 1.95 2.00 2.05 perplexity first layers last layers middle layers (d) Llama3.1-405B 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 number of layers in INT8 9.50 9.75 10.00 10.25 10.50 10.75 11.00 11.25 11.50 perplexity first layers last layers middle layers (e) Phi-3-mini-3.8B 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 number of layers in INT8 16.5 17.0 17.5 18.0 perplexity first layers last layers middle layers (f) Dolly-v2-3B Figure 1: Perplexity of various models on the wikitext dataset (lower is better). Note that the range of the x-axis (number of layers) depends on the model. The y-axis does not start at zero for better readability. systematic study evaluating LLM accuracy across variety of tasks. 4 Selective quantization There are two dimensions in the Transformer archi- tecture along which the quantization can be con- sidered. First, there is the stack of Transformer layers, and so we can select which layers (with all their associated weights) would be quantized into higher precision; we call it horizontal selection . Second, each layer typically consists of four linear modules (that contain weight parameters), two in the attention component (one of them representing the linear projections of query, key and value, aka QKV) and two in the fully-connected feed-forward component. Each of those modules across all Trans- former layers can be selected to be quantized to a higher precision; we call it vertical selection . In the following subsections, we discuss the empirical findings of selective quantization across those two dimensions. 4.1 Horizontal selection Which layers should be kept in higher precision? We experiment with three strategies that select ei- ther X first, last or middle layers of the Transformer stack to be left in higher precision (i.e., quantized to 8bit) while the rest of the model is quantized into 4 bits. We measure the perplexity of the resulting quantized model on the wikitext dataset as we vary X from 1 to the number of layers in a model minus 1. The results in Figure 1 suggest that the model accuracy, as measured by perplexity, is highly sen- sitive to the way Transformer layers are selected. While for smaller Llama models (Figure 1a–c) the perplexity improves the fastest when the first lay- ers are kept in a higher precision, for the largest Llama model (Figure 1d) selecting middle layers for higher precision is beneficial most of the time, and yet for two non-Llama models (Figure 1e–f) it appears the best strategy is to keep the last layers in higher precision. The result for Llama3.3-70B is especially noteworthy – the perplexity drops sub- stantially after only one layer is kept in 8 bits. 4.2 Vertical selection In this section we consider how the accuracy of models depends on which linear modules are se- lected to be left in higher precision. Given four linear modules comprising each Transformer layer, we have 2 4 = 16 ways to make a vertical selec- tion. In the following charts, we refer to the two modules in the attention component as ’1’ and ’2’ and, respectively, to the two modules in the fully- connected feed-forward component as ’3’ and ’4’. We use the ’+’ sign for the composition of mod- ules, e.g., ’1+2+4’ designates a selection mode that 5

---

all 2+3+4 1+3+4 3+4 1+2+4 2+4 1+4 4 1+2+3 2+3 1+3 3 1+2 2 1 none number of layers in INT8 15 16 17 18 19 perplexity (a) Llama3.2-1B all 2+3+4 1+3+4 3+4 1+2+4 2+4 1+4 4 1+2+3 2+3 1+3 3 1+2 2 1 none number of layers in INT8 8.00 8.25 8.50 8.75 9.00 9.25 9.50 perplexity (b) Llama3.1-8B all 2+3+4 1+3+4 3+4 1+2+4 2+4 1+4 4 1+2+3 2+3 1+3 3 1+2 2 1 none number of layers in INT8 4 5 6 7 8 perplexity (c) Llama3.3-70B all 2+3+4 1+3+4 3+4 1+2+4 2+4 1+4 4 1+2+3 2+3 1+3 3 1+2 2 1 none number of layers in INT8 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 perplexity (d) Llama3.1-405B all 2+3+4 1+3+4 3+4 1+2+4 2+4 1+4 4 1+2+3 2+3 1+3 3 1+2 2 1 none number of layers in INT8 9.0 9.5 10.0 10.5 11.0 11.5 perplexity (e) Phi-3-mini-3.8B all 2+3+4 1+3+4 3+4 1+2+4 2+4 1+4 4 1+2+3 2+3 1+3 3 1+2 2 1 none number of layers in INT8 15.0 15.5 16.0 16.5 17.0 17.5 18.0 perplexity (f) Dolly-v2-3B Figure 2: Perplexity of various models on the wikitext dataset (lower is better). The y-axis does not start at zero for better readability. includes modules ’1’, ’2’, and ’4’. The perplexity results for various models and all possible selection modes can be found in Figure 2. Overall, the perplexity rises as less modules are se- lected to be left in higher precision. Notably, how- ever, the perplexity is barely changed when only module ’2’ (the final projection in the self-attention component) is quantized to 4 bits, comparing to the result when all modules kept in 8 bits. In other words, this experiment suggests that model accu- racy is not affected substantially when one specific module is quantized to 4 bits across all layers. 4.3 Hybrid selection Following the observations above, we experiment with a hybrid selections strategy, in which we select X layers (first for all models but Llama3.1-405B and middle for Llama3.1-405B, based on the results in Figure 1) and modules ’1+3+4’ in those selected layers are quantized to 8 bit, while the rest of the model is quantized into 4 bit. We choose X to be 1 / 4 or 1 / 2 of the number of the layers. Note that when 1 / 4 of the model uses 8 bit precision while the rest uses 4 bit, the model is effectively quan- tized into 5 bit, on average. Similarly, for the case of half and half, the model is effectively quantized into 6 bit. However, since we also quantize one of the four linear modules into 4 bits, the average pre- cision is even lower than that. Yet, for simplicity sake, we refer to those variants RTN- ˜ 5 and RTN- ˜ 6, respectively. In addition, for the LLama-3.1 70B model we experiment with a variant in which only modules ’1+3+4’ of the first layer are quantized to 8 bit; the rest of the layers are quantized to 4 bit. We refer to this variant as RTN-˜ 4. The results for models RTN- ˜ 4, RTN- ˜ 5 and RTN- ˜ 6 are presented in Table 2. As expected, the ac- curacy of the models increases with the increased precision. In particular, RTN- ˜ 6 is able to recover most accuracy lost by RTN-4. The recovery rate of RTN- ˜ 5 improves over RTN-4, and although it falls slightly below that of RTN- ˜ 6, the accuracy of RTN- ˜ 5 matches or exceeds performance of GPTQ, AWQ and BnB for all considered models. This suggests that RTN- ˜ 5 is able to strike good tradeoff point between the size of the resulting model and its accuracy. 5 Improving Latency with Marlin We base our custom CUDA kernels for RTN on the Marlin project (Frantar et al., 2024) that imple- ments high performance mixed-precision GEMM 6

---

Llama-3.1 Method Avg. (6 tasks) ↑ Wikitext ↓ 8B Baseline 66.07 8.64 RTN-˜ 6 65.80 9.07 RTN-˜ 5 64.93 9.25 70B Baseline 71.67 3.94 RTN-˜ 6 71.27 4.47 RTN-˜ 5 71.32 4.73 RTN-˜ 4 71.55 4.91 405B Baseline 73.99 1.74 RTN-˜ 6 74.24 1.86 RTN-˜ 5 73.81 1.95 Llama-3.2 Method Avg. (6 tasks) ↑ Wikitext ↓ 1B Baseline 51.07 15.82 RTN-˜ 6 50.77 17.21 RTN-˜ 5 50.02 17.73 3B Baseline 59.26 12.29 RTN-˜ 6 58.46 12.91 RTN-˜ 5 57.54 13.13 Table 2: Zero-shot accuracy on six common tasks (the higher is the better) and perplexity measured on the wikitext dataset (the lower is the better), measured with three variants of the Llama3.1 model and two variants of the Llama3.2 model. operations. The Marlin kernel expects a specific interleaved data layout for the tensor representing quantized weights. As a result, we reshuffle the data quantized with RTN to match that specific layout. This operation takes place once (for each weights tensor), while loading and quantizing data, and does not have any impact on the runtime per- formance during inference. Being designed specifically for batch sizes of 16–32 tokens, we discover that the Marlin kernels perform poorly when they are invoked with tensors representing activations of a large input dimension. Such tensors are common in realistic workloads since the input dimension is defined by a product of the batch size by the length of (number of to- kens in) each input. Hence, when the batch size is low (or even just 1), a long prompt can lead to activations tensor with a large input dimension. The issue is highlighted by the data collected with a built-in benchmark in the Marlin repo 2 . This benchmark varies the batch size and measures the average latency of running GEMM operations with matrices corresponding to shapes employed by lin- ear modules of a specific model; the results for 2 https://github . com/IST-DASLab/marlin/blob/ master/bench . py 1 2 4 8 16 32 64 128 256 512 1K 2K 4K 8K 16K batch size 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 speedup over Torch Marlin Dequant-and-Torch Figure 3: Speedup over the default GEMM implemen- tation in PyTorch for tensor shapes corresponding to linear modules of the LLama3.1-8B model the LLama3.1-8B model are depicted in Figure 3 where we show the speedup of the Marlin kernel relative to the GEMM operation implemented by PyTorch; the speedup falls below 1 for batch size over 128 tokens 3 . We mitigate the issue above by introducing a dual-path approach into the implementation of the forward path for linear module of models quan- tized with RTN (this path invokes the GEMM op- erations). In particular, when the input dimension of the activations tensor is larger or equal than a certain threshold ( 1024 , in our case), we switch to a path that dequantizes the weights into the full (16 bit) precision and invokes the PyTorch-based GEMM kernel. As shown in Figure 3, the over- head of dequantization relative to the latency of the GEMM operation decreases as the size of the activations tensor grows. We note that the origi- nal implementation of AWQ in vLLM (which is not based on Marlin) takes a similar dual-path ap- proach 4 . The practical consequence of the aforemen- tioned discussion is that one needs to pay atten- tion to the input dimension of the activations tensor during inference. Specifically, by default, vLLM slices the given prompt into chunks of a certain size ( 512 tokens in v0.6.4, changed later to 2048 tokens in v0.7.0). As Figure 3 shows, inputs of 3 We note that the authors of Marlin mention that their kernels target Nvidia’s Ampere architecture (Frantar et al., 2024). We performed the same experiment on a machine with A100 GPUs, and the results were qualitatively similar, though Marlin kept the advantage over PyTorch for longer, with the speedup falling below 1 for batches over 256 tokens. 4 See https://github . com/vllm-project/vllm/blob/ main/vllm/model_executor/layers/quantization/ awq . py 7

---

512 tokens lead to nearly the worst slowdown for Marlin kernels over the baseline GEMM imple- mentation. As a result, we set the prompt chunk size (controlled by the max_num_batched_tokens parameter in vLLM) to 16 K in all latency exper- iments described below. We note that this setting improves performance not only for RTN, but for all other evaluated baselines, as it helps to utilize better tensor cores involved in executing GEMM by increasing the amount of computation per each GEMM invocation. We evaluate the generation performance of sev- eral Llama models, in its baseline configuration as well as when quantized using RTN (with various levels of precision) and using GPTQ and AWQ. We use two different setups – one with a short prompt of 256 tokens and output length of 32 tokens, and another with a long prompt of 4096 tokens and out- put length of 512 tokens. The first setup represents a short question-answer interaction with a chatbot, while the other represents a query with more con- text, such as one that might be generated by a code completion system. (Since the results were similar for both setups, we include only figures for the first setup, for brevity). For all experiments, we use the built-in vLLM latency benchmark 5 and run all vari- ants using the same hardware (1/4/8 H100 GPUs for Llama-3.1 8B/70B/405B models, respectively). Since the baseline Llama-3.1 405B model does not fit into 8 H100 GPUs, we do not collect results for this configuration. The generation throughput results are shown in Table 3. For small batches, RTN-8 outperforms the baseline by up to 25% , while RTN-4 outperforms the baseline by up to 37% . The speedup achieved by all RTN variants over BnB is substantial, espe- cially for small batches. This result highlights the performance cost paid by BnB for improving accu- racy by separating and handling outliers in model weights. Note that RTN-4 also outperforms GPTQ and AWQ (on small batches) despite that all three methods employ Marlin-based kernels and 4bit pre- cision. We attribute this advantage of RTN to its relative simplicity that, among other things, does not consider zero points for its quantization groups (unlike both GPTQ and AWQ), hence requiring less floating point operations for dequantization. As ex- pected, the performance of RTN- ˜ 6 and RTN- ˜ 5 falls in between RTN-8 and RTN-4. For large batches, 5 https://github . com/vllm-project/vllm/blob/ main/benchmarks/benchmark_latency . py Input 256 / Output 32 Llama-3.1 Batch Baseline RTN-8 RTN-˜ 6 RTN-˜ 5 RTN-4 GPTQ AWQ BnB 8B 1 8.03 6.05 5.47 5.2 5.06 6.31 5.4 9.36 4 2.1 1.71 1.58 1.51 1.47 1.71 1.63 7.08 16 0.7 0.61 0.56 0.57 0.55 0.63 0.74 1.98 64 0.36 0.35 0.35 0.35 0.35 0.38 0.58 0.69 256 0.29 0.31 0.31 0.31 0.31 0.32 0.53 0.4 1024 0.29 0.31 0.31 0.31 0.31 0.32 0.53 0.4 70B 1 19.38 14.86 13.31 12.73 12.13 18.32 13.22 25.24 4 5.3 4.3 3.93 3.77 3.65 5.39 4.09 17.57 16 1.79 1.53 1.44 1.4 1.36 2.26 1.89 4.88 64 0.92 0.92 0.91 0.91 0.9 1.55 1.51 1.74 256 0.73 0.81 0.79 0.78 0.78 1.4 1.37 0.99 1024 0.73 0.81 0.79 0.78 0.78 1.4 1.37 0.99 405B 1 N/A 32.59 29.22 26.87 25.23 54.17 27.7 59.91 4 N/A 9.96 8.98 8.59 8.19 16.59 9.39 47.73 16 N/A 3.88 3.63 3.54 3.43 7.31 4.99 13.38 64 N/A 2.36 2.33 2.32 2.32 5.2 4.08 4.72 256 N/A 2.22 2.19 2.18 2.17 4.93 3.9 2.7 1024 N/A 2.22 2.19 2.18 2.16 4.92 3.9 2.7 Table 3: Token generation throughput (in msec/token) measured with three variants of the Llama3.1 model, on prompts of 256 tokens and output length of 32 tokens. RTN variants trail closely the baseline thanks to its dual-path approach discussed above. Marlin-based kernels for AWQ and GPTQ do not utilize this approach and hence perform poorly in this case. 6 Discussion RTN is one of the simplest and easily applicable, data-free quantization techniques for LLMs and be- yond. In this paper we demonstrate how enhancing RTN through selective quantization combined with efficient CUDA kernels can propel it to match and often surpass more sophisticated techniques that are not data-free. In particular, selective quantiza- tion enables a fine-grained tradeoff between space and accuracy; in one particular case of the pop- ular open-source Llama-3.1/3.3 70B models, less than 0 . 05 extra bits, on average, per each parameter is all that is needed to close the accuracy gap be- tween RTN and other state-of-the-art quantization techniques. At the same time, the efficient CUDA kernel allows RTN to achieve higher generation throughput than its more advanced competitors. This positions RTN as a viable and practical choice for quantizing LLMs. As more extremely large LLMs adopt the MoE (mixture of experts) architecture (DeepSeek-AI, 2025; Meta, 2025), the selective quantization is well positioned to be applied to such models. For instance, certain experts (e.g., generalists ) might be more critical to the end-to-end accuracy of the model than others; the selective quantization can seamlessly quantize the former to 8 bits and the latter to 4. Exploring the application of the selective quantization to such models is left for the future 8

---

work. Another interesting question we want to consider is automating the selection of layers and modules for higher precision under given memory budget and/or accuracy degradation target. Limitations As presented, this work has several limitations, which we aim to address in future work. First, our evaluation puts heavy focus on Llama mod- els. Although those models are a popular choice in open-source community, and we do compliment our experiments with other open-source models, robust evaluation of more models of various sizes would strengthen our findings further. In particular, as newer models adopt the MoE (mixture of ex- perts) architecture, including the latest generation of Llama 4 models (Meta, 2025), it would be in- teresting to confirm the application of our ideas to such models as well. (We note that our experiments with a Mixtral 8x22B model provide evidence that they apply). Second, while selective RTN can match and out- perform other quantization techniques, the selec- tion of layers and modules for higher precision is limited to a manual process. Automating this pro- cess, all while maintaining the practical advantages of RTN, including its data-free nature, remains an open question. Acknowledgements The author would like to thank Jingqiao Zhang, Ming Lin and Arthur Cheng for valuable discus- sions and evaluation of ideas presented in this pa- per. References Amey Agrawal, Nitin Kedia, Ashish Panwar, Jayashree Mohan, Nipun Kwatra, Bhargav S. Gulavani, Alexey Tumanov, and Ramachandran Ramjee. 2024. Taming throughput-latency tradeoff in LLM inference with sarathi-serve. In Proc. of USENIX Symposium on Op- erating Systems Design and Implementation, OSDI , pages 117–134. Yongqi An, Xu Zhao, Tao Yu, Ming Tang, and Jinqiao Wang. 2025. Systematic outliers in large language models. In Proc. of International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) . Yidong Chen, Chen Zhang, Rongchao Dong, Haoyuan Zhang, Yonghua Zhang, Zhonghua Lu, and Jidong Zhai. 2024. Mixq: Taming dynamic outliers in mixed-precision quantization by online prediction. In Proc. International Conference for High Perfor- mance Computing, Networking, Storage, and Analy- sis (SC) . Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, and Oyvind Tafjord. 2018. Think you have solved question an- swering? try ARC, the AI2 reasoning challenge. CoRR , abs/1803.05457. DeepSeek-AI. 2025. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reason- ing capability in LLMs via reinforcement learning. CoRR , abs/2501.12948. Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Younes Belkada, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2022. LLM.int8(): 8-bit matrix multi- plication for transformers at scale. In Proc. of Inter- national Conference on Neural Information Process- ing Systems (NIPS) . Zhen Dong, Zhewei Yao, Amir Gholami, Michael W. Mahoney, and Kurt Keutzer. 2019. Hawq: Hessian aware quantization of neural networks with mixed- precision. In Proc. IEEE/CVF International Confer- ence on Computer Vision (ICCV) . Hugging Face. The model hub. https:// huggingface . co/docs/hub/en/models-the-hub . Elias Frantar, Saleh Ashkboos, Torsten Hoefler, and Dan Alistarh. 2022. GPTQ: accurate post-training quantization for generative pre-trained transformers. CoRR . Elias Frantar, Roberto L. Castro, Jiale Chen, Torsten Hoefler, and Dan Alistarh. 2024. Marlin: Mixed- precision auto-regressive parallel inference on large language models. CoRR , 2408.11743. Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Baber Abbasi, Stella Bider- man, Sid Black, Anthony DiPofi, Charles Foster, Laurence Golding, Jeffrey Hsu, Alain Le Noac’h, Haonan Li, Kyle McDonell, Niklas Muennighoff, Chris Ociepa, Jason Phang, Laria Reynolds, Hailey Schoelkopf, Aviya Skowron, Lintang Sutawika, and 5 others. 2024. A framework for few-shot language model evaluation. Amir Gholami, Sehoon Kim, Zhen Dong, Zhewei Yao, Michael W. Mahoney, and Kurt Keutzer. 2021. A survey of quantization methods for efficient neural network inference. CoRR , abs/2103.13630. Daniel Han and Michael Han. 2025. Run DeepSeek R1 Dynamic 1.58-bit. https://unsloth . ai/blog/ deepseekr1-dynamic . Accessed on 03/01/2025. Wei Huang, Yangdong Liu, Haotong Qin, Ying Li, Shiming Zhang, Xianglong Liu, Michele Magno, and Xiaojuan Qi. 2024. BiLLM: pushing the limit of post- training quantization for LLMs. In Proc. of Interna- tional Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) . Qiao Jin, Bhuwan Dhingra, Zhengping Liu, William Cohen, and Xinghua Lu. 2019. Pubmedqa: A dataset for biomedical research question answering. In Proc. 9

---

Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan- guage Processing and International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) . Sehoon Kim, Coleman Hooper, Amir Gholami, Zhen Dong, Xiuyu Li, Sheng Shen, Michael W. Mahoney, and Kurt Keutzer. 2024. SqueezeLLM: dense-and- sparse quantization. In Proc. of International Confer- ence on Machine Learning (ICML) . Raghuraman Krishnamoorthi. 2018. Quantizing deep convolutional networks for efficient inference: A whitepaper. CoRR , abs/1806.08342. Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph Gon- zalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Efficient memory management for large language model serv- ing with PagedAttention. In Proc. of ACM Sympo- sium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP) , page 611–626. Ji Lin, Jiaming Tang, Haotian Tang, Shang Yang, Wei- Ming Chen, Wei-Chen Wang, Guangxuan Xiao, Xingyu Dang, Chuang Gan, and Song Han. 2024. AWQ: activation-aware weight quantization for on- device LLM compression and acceleration. In Proc. of Conference on Machine Learning and Systems (MLSys) . Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. 2022. TruthfulQA: Measuring how models mimic human falsehoods. In Proc. Annual Meeting of the Associa- tion for Computational Linguistics (ACL) . Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and Richard Socher. 2016. Pointer sentinel mixture mod- els. Preprint , arXiv:1609.07843. Meta. 2024. Introducing Llama 3.1: Our most capable models to date. https://ai . meta . com/blog/meta- llama-3-1 . Accessed on 02/20/2025. Meta. 2025. The Llama 4 herd: The begin- ning of a new era of natively multimodal AI innovation. https://ai . meta . com/blog/llama- 4-multimodal-intelligence . Accessed on 04/09/2025. Keisuke Sakaguchi, Ronan Le Bras, Chandra Bhagavat- ula, and Yejin Choi. 2019. WINOGRANDE: an ad- versarial winograd schema challenge at scale. CoRR , abs/1907.10641. Alon Talmor, Jonathan Herzig, Nicholas Lourie, and Jonathan Berant. 2019. CommonsenseQA: A ques- tion answering challenge targeting commonsense knowledge. In Proc. Conference of the North Amer- ican Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 . Hanlin Tang, Yifu Sun, Decheng Wu, Kai Liu, Jianchen Zhu, and Zhanhui Kang. 2023. EasyQuant: An effi- cient data-free quantization algorithm for LLMs. In Proc. of Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 9119–9128. Lucas Wilkinson. 2024. Introducing Machete, a Mixed-Input GEMM Kernel Optimized for NVIDIA Hopper GPUs. https://neuralmagic . com/blog/ introducing-machete-a-mixed-input-gemm- kernel-optimized-for-nvidia-hopper-gpus . Accessed on 02/07/2025. Xiaoxia Wu, Haojun Xia, Stephen Youn, Zhen Zheng, Shiyang Chen, Arash Bakhtiari, Michael Wyatt, Reza Yazdani Aminabadi, Yuxiong He, Olatunji Ruwase, Leon Song, and Zhewei Yao. 2023. Ze- roquant(4+2): Redefining llms quantization with a new fp6-centric strategy for diverse generative tasks. CoRR , 2312.08583. Guangxuan Xiao, Ji Lin, Mickael Seznec, Hao Wu, Julien Demouth, and Song Han. 2023. Smoothquant: accurate and efficient post-training quantization for large language models. In Proc. of International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) . Ying Zhang, Peng Zhang, Mincong Huang, Jingyang Xiang, Yujie Wang, Chao Wang, Yineng Zhang, Lei Yu, Chuan Liu, and Wei Lin. 2024. QQQ: Quality quattuor-bit quantization for large language models. CoRR , 2406.09904. Yiren Zhou, Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli, Ngai- Man Cheung, and Pascal Frossard. 2018. Adaptive quantization for deep neural network. In Proc. AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 32. Xiaotian Zhu, Wengang Zhou, and Houqiang Li. 2018. Adaptive layerwise quantization for deep neural net- work compression. In Proc. IEEE International Con- ference on Multimedia and Expo (ICME) , pages 1–6. Xunyu Zhu, Jian Li, Yong Liu, Can Ma, and Weiping Wang. 2024. A survey on model compression for large language models. Transactions of the Associa- tion for Computational Linguistics , 12:1556–1577. A Extended Accuracy Results 10

---

Llama-3.1 #Bits Method Winogrande ARC-e ARC-c TruthfulQA CommonSenseQA PubMedQA Avg. Wikitext 8B 16 Baseline 73.64 81.94 51.71 36.96 77.15 75.00 66.07 8.64 8 RTN 73.72 81.78 51.79 36.84 77.07 75.60 66.13 8.65 4 RTN 74.27 80.89 50.26 35.25 74.86 70.40 64.32 9.57 4 GPTQ 71.98 81.44 50.85 35.01 74.77 76.40 65.07 9.04 4 AWQ 73.09 80.89 51.02 34.76 75.84 76.20 65.30 9.10 4 BnB 73.56 81.06 51.54 36.47 75.51 75.40 65.59 9.15 70B 16 Baseline 79.01 86.78 62.54 40.64 80.67 80.40 71.67 3.94 8 RTN 79.16 86.62 62.46 40.51 80.51 80.40 71.61 3.95 4 RTN 77.27 85.56 60.92 40.27 80.34 78.40 70.46 8.19 4 GPTQ 78.14 86.11 61.18 40.39 79.93 79.60 70.89 4.61 4 AWQ 79.40 86.62 62.12 40.27 80.84 80.00 71.54 4.58 4 BnB 79.24 85.52 60.84 40.88 80.18 79.20 70.98 7.17 405B 16 Baseline 82.64 88.38 64.76 46.27 84.68 77.20 73.99 1.74 8 RTN 82.79 88.17 64.85 46.51 84.77 77.60 74.12 1.75 4 RTN 83.03 88.26 64.76 45.65 84.36 77.20 73.88 2.08 4 GPTQ 81.37 88.26 65.10 46.14 83.62 75.40 73.31 1.99 4 AWQ 82.72 88.26 64.59 45.90 84.19 77.20 73.81 2.00 4 BnB 82.79 88.17 64.33 47.12 84.44 76.20 73.84 1.95 Llama-3.2 #Bits Method Winogrande ARC-e ARC-c TruthfulQA CommonSenseQA PubMedQA Avg. Wikitext 1B 16 Baseline 59.67 68.73 35.58 27.05 55.36 60.00 51.07 15.82 8 RTN 59.43 68.35 35.41 27.17 55.45 60.80 51.10 15.83 4 RTN 59.12 63.34 32.17 24.85 48.48 59.80 47.96 19.76 4 GPTQ 57.46 63.51 31.83 26.07 41.20 58.00 46.34 17.64 4 AWQ 59.19 66.67 34.73 25.46 51.52 58.00 49.26 17.32 4 BnB 57.38 65.32 35.32 25.46 53.15 57.40 49.01 17.01 3B 16 Baseline 67.88 74.41 43.43 32.31 67.73 69.80 59.26 12.29 8 RTN 67.32 73.91 43.60 32.68 67.73 70.20 59.24 12.31 4 RTN 66.30 69.74 39.93 31.33 62.57 64.60 55.74 13.34 4 GPTQ 65.75 71.89 41.72 30.97 65.77 69.20 57.55 13.16 4 AWQ 67.56 72.98 41.30 29.62 65.36 67.60 57.40 12.69 4 BnB 67.64 72.26 41.98 29.99 66.50 70.60 58.16 12.73 Table 4: Zero-shot accuracy on six common tasks (the higher is the better) and perplexity measured on the wikitext dataset (the lower is the better), measured with three variants of the Llama3.1 model and two variants of the Llama3.2 model. 11

